<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a id="CHAPTER_XIII"/>CHAPTER XIII.<br/>
<small>BARADA BABU’S PUPIL.</small></h2>
<p>
        BARADA Babu had an extraordinary and unusual knowledge of educational
        methods. He had special acquaintance with all the different faculties
        and emotions of the mind, and with the methods whereby men may become
        intelligent and virtuous by the proper exercise of them. A teacher’s
        work is no light one: there are many who have but a mere smattering of
        knowledge, and take up teaching just from want of other occupation; good
        instruction cannot be expected from men of this type. To be a genuine
        teacher, a man must be thoroughly acquainted with the whole tendency of
        the mind and all its energies; and he must by calm and patient
        observation discover and learn the best way to become a really practical
        guide of youth. To teach in a haphazard fashion, without doing something
        of this kind, is like striking a stone with a
        <i lang="bn">kodàli</i>;
        it may fall on the stone a hundred times, but not a handful of soil will
        it cut. Now Barada Babu was a man of great acuteness and shrewd
        observation: he had so long paid special attention to the subject of
        education that he was well versed in the best methods of instruction:
        and the learning that was imparted according his system was really
        solid. As education is now in Government schools, its real end is not
        attained, for the reason that nothing is done for the harmonious
        development of the faculties of the mind and the emotions. The scholars
        learn everything by heart, and consequently memory alone is awakened:
        the faculty of thought and reflection generally lies dormant, and the
        idea of bringing the different activities of the mind into play seems
        not to exist. The chief end of education being to develop the mental
        powers and qualities harmoniously with the gradual growth of the
        scholar, one faculty should not be abnormally exerted at the expense of
        another. Just as the body gets compact and grows well-knit by an
        harmonious exercise of all the limbs, so the mind is strengthened and
        the intelligence developed by an harmonious exercise of the sum total of
        their energies. All the moral qualities likewise should be
        simultaneously elicited: because one may be brought into play it does
        not follow that all will be. Reverence for truth, for instance, may be
        developed, without a single particle of kindliness: a man may have a
        large element of kindliness in his nature, but no practical knowledge of
        the business of life. Again, he may be perfectly honest in his business
        relations, and yet display indifference or absolute want of affection
        for his father, mother, wife and children; or he may be all that is
        proper in his domestic relations, but wanting in uprightness in his
        business affairs. Barada Babu was well aware in fact, that faith in
        God was the foundation of the due development and exercise of the
        qualities of the mind, and that they could only be duly developed in
        proportion as that faith increased; for otherwise the task was as
        futile as trying to write on water.
    </p>
<p>
        Most fortunately for him, Ramlall had become Barada Babu’s pupil, and
        all his faculties were being harmoniously developed and exercised.
        Association with a good man is a far more potent factor in developing
        moral qualities than mere instruction; indeed by such intercourse a mind
        may be as completely transformed as a branch of the wild plum grafted on
        to a mango tree. So great is the majesty of a really noble character
        that even its shadow falling on one that is base and corrupt raises it
        in time to its own image. By association with Barada Babu the mind of
        Ramlail became almost a complete reflection of his. With the object of
        making himself strong, as soon as he rose in the morning, he would take
        a stroll in the open air; for strength of mind he knew could not exist
        without strength of body: after his walk, he would return home and
        engage in prayer and meditation. The only books he read were those the
        perusal of which promoted the growth of intelligence and good character,
        and the only persons he conversed with were those whose conversation had
        the same effect. On merely hearing the name of any good person, he would
        go and visit him, making no enquiries about his caste or condition in
        life. So keen was his intelligence that in conversation with anyone he
        would speak only on matters of real moment: he had no taste for gossip.
        If anybody spoke on subjects of but trifling importance, he succeeded by
        force of his intelligence in extracting the pith of the matter, as a
        fruit-extractor the pulp of the fruit. The steady growth of faith in
        God, of morality, and of a good understanding formed the burden of his
        meditations. By such consistent conduct as this, his disposition, his
        character and his whole conduct became more and more worthy of
        commendation.
    </p>
<p>
        Goodness can never be hid. The people in the village would say to each
        other: <q>Ah, Ramlall is the Prahlad of a family of
        Daityas<a id="FNanchor_26_26"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_26_26">[26]</a>.</q>
        In all their griefs and misfortunes he was ever to the front with his
        help. He did all he could think of to assist any in need of help, by his
        personal exertions on their behalf, whether with his purse or with his
        understanding. Old and young, they were all known to Ramlail, and were
        all his friends. If they heard him abused, it was as though a dart had
        pierced their ears; if they heard him praised, great was the rejoicing.
        The old women of the village would say to each other: <q>If we had such
        a child we should never let him out of our sight. Oh, what a store of
        merit must his mother have laid up to have got a son like this!</q>

        The young women, observing Ramlall’s beauty and good qualities,
        exclaimed in their hearts: <q>God grant that such a husband may fall to
        our lot!</q>
</p>
<p>
        Ramlall’s good disposition and character were manifested in manifold
        ways, both at home and abroad. He never failed in any single particular
        of his duty towards each member of his home circle. His father,
        observing him, thought to himself;— <q>Ah, my younger son is becoming
        lax in his observances of Hindu religious customs! he does not keep the
        sacred mark on his forehead, nor use the customary vessels at his
        prayers, nor even the beads for the repetition of the sacred name of
        <i lang="bn">Hori</i><a id="FNanchor_27_27"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_27_27">[27]</a>:
        and yet he does perform his devotions after his own manner, and
        is not addicted to vice. We may tell any number of lies: the boy, on
        the contrary, knows nothing but the truth. He is most devoted to his
        parents, yet never consents to what he thinks wrong, even at our urgent
        request. Now I find a good deal of duplicity necessary in my business:
        both truth and falsehood are requisite. How otherwise could I keep up
        the great festivals that I have constantly to be celebrating in my
        house, the Dol Jatra, the Durga Pujah and others? Now Matilall may be a
        wicked boy, but he keeps up his Hindu observances; besides, after all, I
        do not think he is so very bad; he is young yet, he must sow his wild
        oats.</q>

        Ramlall’s mother and sisters were deeply affected by his many good
        qualities: they rejoiced with the joy of those who out of dense
        darkness see light. Matilall’s evil behaviour had had a most
        distressing effect upon them: bowed down as they had been in shame at
        the evil reports they heard of him, they had known little ease of mind.
        Now again there was in their hearts, because of Ramlall’s good
        qualities, and their faces were lighted up with joy. At one time all the
        men-servants and maid-servants of the house, getting only abuse or blows
        from Matilall, had been in terror of their lives: now, softened by
        Ramlall’s gentle address and kind treatment, they paid all the
        greater attention to their work.
    </p>
<p>
        When Matilall and his companions, Haladhar and Gadadhar, saw this
        behaviour of Ramlall, they remarked to each other that the boy had gone
        silly,— must be cracked,— and said to the master of the
        house:

        <q>This brat should certainly be sent to a lunatic asylum: he is a mere
        child, yet his sole talk day and night is of virtue: it is disgusting
        to hear an old man’s words in the mouth of a child.</q>

        Others of Matilall’s companions would occasionally say:—

        <q>Mati Babu, you are in luck’s way: things don’t look
        promising for Ramlall: he will soon come to grief if he makes a parade
        of virtue like this: you will then get all the property, and there will
        be no obstacle to your complete enjoyment. Even if he does live, he will
        be little better than an idiot. But what can you expect? what says the
        proverb?

        ‘As the teacher so the taught.’

        Could he find no other master in this wide world that he must get hold
        of some <i lang="bn">mantras</i>
        from an Eastern Bengalee, and go wandering about parading his
        virtue before the world? If he does this much more, we will send him
        and his teacher about their business. The canting humbug! he goes about
        saying:

        ‘Ah, how happy I should be if my elder brother were to give up the
        society of his evil companions!’

        ‘Ah, if my elder brother were only to frequent the society of
        Barada Babu, what a good thing it should be!’

        Ha ha! Barada Babu indeed,— the dismal old blockhead, a very
        prince of prigs. Look out, Mati Babu: take care that you do not after
        all get under his influence and go to him? What, are we to go to school
        again?  If he wishes, let him come to us and be taught: we are very
        hard up for a little amusement.</q>
</p>
<p>
        Thakchacha was always hearing about Ramlall, and he began to think the
        matter over: the one aim of his life was to find a favourable
        opportunity for making a successful swoop or two on Baburam Babu’s
        property. So far, most of the suits-at-law had ended disastrously, and
        he had had no opportunity for such a stroke: yet he never failed to
        keep on baiting his ground before casting his nets. Ramlall however
        having become what he was, he could not expect any fish to fall into his
        net, for however skilfully it might be cast the boy would advise his
        father not to enter it. Thakchacha saw then that a great obstacle had
        presented itself in his way and he thus reflected:

        <q>The moon of hope must have sunk behind a cloud of despair, for it is
        no longer visible.</q>

        After profound deliberation, he observed one day to his employer;—

        <q>Babu Saheb, your youngest son’s behaviour has made me very
        anxious: I do not think he can be quite right in his mind. He is always
        angry with me and tells everybody that I have corrupted you: my heart
        is wounded when I hear this. Ah, Babu Saheb! this is not as it should be:
        if he speaks like this to me, he may one day speak harshly to you. The
        boy will doubtless become good and gentle in time, but now he is boorish
        and rude, and must be corrected; besides, so far as I can judge, you may
        lose all your property if this course is allowed.</q>

        A casual remark may very easily disturb the mind of a man who is
        naturally rather dense. As a boat in the hands of an unskilful steersman
        is tossed about in a storm, unable to make the shore, so a dull-gritted
        man is in almost constant perplexity, seeing only chaos around him: he
        can himself come to no decision on the merits of any subject. For one
        thing, poor Baburam Babu was naturally rather thick-headed, and for
        another, Thakchacha’s words were to him as the sacred Vedas: so
        he stood stupidly gazing about like a man in a maze, and after a while
        asked Thakchacha what plan he could suggest. That astute individual
        replied:

        <q>Your boy, sir, is not a wicked boy: it is Barada Babu that is the
        origin of all the mischief. Only get him out of the way, and the boy
        will be all right. Ah, Babu Saheb! the son of a Hindu should observe
        all the ordinances of his religion as a Hindu. A man has need of both
        good and bad qualities if he is to engage in the business of this life:
        the world is not all honest: what use would it be to me if I were the
        only upright man in it?</q>
</p>
<p>
        Men always regard with approval, as the opinion of a really great mind,
        language that is in keeping with their own convictions. Thakchacha was
        well aware that he had only to talk about the observance of Hindu
        ceremonial, and the preservation of property, and his aim would be
        accomplished; and, as a matter of fact, it was by such talk that he
        achieved his end. When Baburam heard the advice Thakchacha gave, he
        acquiesced at once in it, remarking: <q>If this is your opinion, finish
        the matter off at once: I will supply you with any money you may want,
        but you must work out the plan yourself.</q>
</p>
<p>
        There was a good deal of discussion of this kind about Ramlall. <q>Many
        sages, many saws,</q> says the proverb.

        Some said: <q>The boy is good in this respect:</q> others would reply:
        <q>But not good in this.</q>

        One critic complained: <q>He is deficient in one important quality,
        which makes all his other excellences go for nothing, just as when a
        speck of cow-dung has fallen into a vessel of milk, the whole is
        tainted.</q>

        Another retorted: <q>The boy is perfect.</q>
</p>
<p>
        Thus time went on. At last it chanced that Baburam Babu’s eldest
        daughter fell dangerously ill. Her parents called in a number of
        physicians to see her. Matilall, needless to say, never once came near
        his sister, but went about saying that a speedy death was preferable to
        the life of a widow in a rich man’s house; and during the time of
        her illness, he only indulged himself the more. Ramlall on the other
        hand was unremitting in his attention: foregoing both food and sleep,
        and full of anxious thought, he exerted himself to the utmost for the
        girl’s recovery. But she did not recover, and as she was dying
        she put her hand on her younger brother’s head, saying:
        <q>Ah, brother Ram! if I die, and am born a girl in my next birth, God
        grant that I may have a brother like you. I cannot tell you what you
        have done for me. God make you as happy as you wish.</q>

        With these words, his sister breathed her last.
    </p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/>
<p> <span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_99">[99]</a></span><br/> </p>
<p> </p> <p> </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
