<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a id="CHAPTER_II"/>CHAPTER <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>.<br/>
			<small>MATILALL’S ENGLISH EDUCATION.</small></h2>
			<p>WHEN Baburam heard of the evil plight of the Munshi Saheb, the only remark he made was: <q>My boy, Matilall, is not a boy like that. What can you expect from such a low fellow as that Mussulman?</q> He then considered that as Persian was going out of fashion, it might be a good thing for the boy to learn English. Just as a madman has occasional glimmerings of sense, so even a man lacking in intelligence has occasional happy inspirations. When he had come to this decision, it occurred to Baburam Babu that he was a very indifferent English scholar himself: he only knew one or two English words: his neighbours too, he reflected, knew about as much of it as he himself did: he must consult with some man of learning and experience. As he went over in his mind the list of his kinsmen and relatives, it struck him that Beni Babu, of Bally, was a very competent person. Business habits generate promptness of action, and he proceeded without delay to the Vaidyabati Ghât, taking with him a servant and a messenger.</p>
			<p>In the first two months of the rainy season, the months <i lang="bn">Ashar</i> and <i lang="bn">Shravan</i>, most of the boatmen occupy themselves in catching <i lang="bn">hilsa</i> fish with circular nets, and at midday, are generally busy taking their meals.Thus it came about that there was not a boat of any description at the Vaidyabati Ghât. Baburam Babu, full-whiskered, the sacred mark on his nose, dressed in fine lawn with coloured borders, with smart shoes from Phulapukur, a front like the front of Ganesh, a delicate muslin shawl neatly folded over his shoulders, and his cheeks swollen with <i lang="bn">pán</i>, was walking impatiently up and down, calling out to his servant: <q>Ho, there, Hari! I must get to Bally quick; you must hire a passing boat for me for fourpice.</q> Rich men’s servants are often very disrespectful, and Hari made answer: <q>Sir, that is just like you! I had only just sat down to take my food and I have now had to throw it away and leave it in order to attend to your repeated calls. If there had been any boat going down-stream, it might have been hired for a small sum, but it is flood-tide just now, and the boatmen will have to work hard rowing and steering. You might get across for three or four pice if you would arrange to go with others. I cannot possibly hire a passing boat for you for four pice; you might as well ask me to make barley-meal cakes without water.</q> Baburam Babu scowled and said: <q>You are a very insolent fellow; if you speak like that to me again, you get a sound smacking.</q> Now the lower orders of Bengalees tremble even if they make a slip, so Hari endured the rebuke, and quaking all over said to his master: <q>Sir, how can I possibly find a boat? I had no intention of being insolent to you</q>.</p>
			<p>While he was still speaking, a green boat that was being towed up the river on its return journey, approached the <i lang="bn">ghât</i> where they were. After a long argument with the steersman of the boat a bargain was struck, and he agreed to take them across for eight annas. Baburam then got into the boat with his servant and his messenger. When they had got some way on their journey, he began looking about him in every direction, and said to his servant: <q>Hari, this is a fine boat we have got! Hi, steersman! whose house is that over there? Ho! surely that is a sugar factory. Ha! Now prepare me a pipe of tobacco, and strike me a light.</q> Then he pulled away at the gurgling <i lang="bn">hooka</i>, now and again raising himself to look at the porpoises tumbling in the water, and hummed a song of the loves of Krishna<a id="FNanchor_5_5"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_5_5">[5]</a>.:⁠—</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">
						<q>When late to Brindabun, O Krishna! I came,</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>Your home there, alas! I found only a name.</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>As it was the ebb, the boat dropped quickly down-stream and the boatmen had no occasion to exert themselves: one sat on the edge of the boat; another, bearded like an old billy-goat, keeping his look-out on the top of the cabin, sang in the Chittagong dialect the popular song which goes:⁠—</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">
						<q>E’en the earring of gold shall loosen its hold,</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>By the lute-string’s languishing strain cajoled.</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>The sun had not yet set when the boat reached its moorings at the Deonagaji Ghât. Four boatmen, panting and puffing with their efforts, lifted Baburam Babu, a mass of solid flesh, out of the boat, and set him safe on land.</p>
			<p>Beni Babu received his relative very courteously and begged him to be seated, while his house servant, Ram, at once brought some tobacco he had prepared for him. Baburam Babu was very fond of his pipe: after a few pulls he remarked: <q>How is it that this <i lang="bn">hooka</i> is hissing?</q> A servant who is in constant attendance upon a man of intelligence soon becomes intelligent himself: Ram, divining what was wrong, put a clearing-rod in the <i lang="bn">hooka</i>, changed the water, supplied it with some fresh tobacco, sweet and compact, and brought it back with a larger mouthpiece. Finding the <i lang="bn">hooka</i> placed by him, Baburam Babu took entire possession, as though he had taken a permanent lease of it, and as he puffed away, emitting clouds of smoke, chattered with Beni Babu.</p>
			<p><span class="stage-direction">Beni.⁠—</span> Would you not like to get up now, sir, and take some light refreshment?</p>
			<p><span class="stage-direction">Baburam.⁠—</span> It is already rather late: I don’t think I will just now. I am quite at home, thank you; I would have called for it if I had wanted it. But please just listen to what I have to say. My son Matilall has shown that he possesses remarkable genius! You would be quite delighted to see the boy. I am anxious to have him taught English; do you think you can get me a master to teach him for some mere trifle?</p>
			<p><span class="stage-direction">Beni.⁠—</span> There are plenty of masters to be had, and a man of moderate ability might be got for from twenty to twenty-five rupees a month.</p>
			<p><span class="stage-direction">Baburam.⁠—</span> What, so much as that? Twenty-five rupees! Oh my dear friend, these religious ceremonies you know are a constant source of expense in my establishment: I have about a hundred people to feed every day; and besides all this, I shall very soon have my son’s marriage to arrange for. Why did I go to the expense of hiring a boat to come here and see you, only to be asked for as much as that after all?</p>
			<p>With this, he put his hands on Beni Babu’s shoulders, and laughed immoderately.</p>
			<p><span class="stage-direction">Beni.⁠—</span> Then put him at some school in Calcutta: the boy might live with some relative, and his education need not in that case cost more than three or four rupees a month.</p>
			<p><span class="stage-direction">Baburam.⁠—</span> What, as much as that? Couldn’t one manage to get the prices down with a little haggling? And is a school education any better than a home one?</p>
			<p><span class="stage-direction">Beni.⁠—</span> Home education is a very excellent thing if you can secure a really first-rate teacher, but such a teacher is not to be had on a small salary. School education has its good points and also its bad points. A healthy spirit of emulation of course springs up amongst a number of boys who are being educated together; but at the same time some of the boys will always be in danger of being corrupted by bad company. Besides when twenty-five or thirty boys are reading in one class, there is a good deal of confusion, and equal attention cannot be paid every day to all the boys alike: consequently all do not make similar progress.</p>
			<p><span class="stage-direction">Baburam.⁠—</span> Anyhow I will send Matilall to you; and when you have looked about you, do try and make some cheap arrangement for me. None of the English gentlemen for whom I once did business are here now: if they had been, I might have got some of them to secure him schooling which would have cost me nothing: it would only have needed a little importunity. However it will be quite enough if my son obtains just a smattering of learning: if he becomes a scholar, he may not remain in the religion of his fathers. So kindly make it your business to see that he becomes a man: I lay the whole responsibility upon you, my friend.</p>
			<p><span class="stage-direction">Beni.⁠—</span> If a boy is to grow into a man, every attention is necessary both when he is at home and when he is away from home: the father must see everything with his own eyes and enter thoroughly into all the boy’s occupations. There is a good deal of business that may be done through commission agencies, but the education of a boy is not one of them.</p>
			<p><span class="stage-direction">Baburam.⁠—</span> That is all very true: regard Matilall then as your son. I shall now get some leisure for my ablutions in the Ganges, for reading the Puranas, and for looking after my concerns; for at present I have no time even for these: besides, all the English training that I possess is training of the old school. Matilall is yours, my dear friend, he is yours! I will rid myself of all anxiety by sending him to you. Adopt any course you think fit, but my dear friend, do take care that the expense is not heavy: you know my position as a man with a number of young children to look after: you can understand that thoroughly, can you not?</p>
			<p>After this conversation with Beni Babu, Baburam Babu returned to his home at Vaidyabati.</p>
			<hr style="width: 65%;"/>
			<p>
				<span class="pagenum">
					<a id="Page_14">[14]</a>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p> </p>
			<p> </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
