<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a id="CHAPTER_XXII"/>CHAPTER XXII.<br/>
<small>MATILALL IN BUSINESS.</small></h2>
<p>
        MATILALL saw that his mother, his brother, and his sister, had now all
        gone from the house. <q>A good riddance!</q> thought he: his path was
        at length cleared of thorns; all bother was at an end. This had come
        about by a slight display of passion on his part,—
        <q>Dhananjayas got rid of by a blow<a id="FNanchor_45_45"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_45_45">[45]</a>!</q>

        True it was, a single blow had sufficed to get rid of them all, but his
        resources were now exhausted. What was to be done?  How could he go on
        living in such style? The small retail shopkeepers would not be put off
        with excuses any more, and no one would supply him with anything on
        credit: just too as the great bathing festival of the
        <i lang="bn">Snan Jatra</i>
        was coming off. The expenses of engaging a
        <i lang="bn">budgerow</i>
        had to be provided: earnest money<a id="FNanchor_46_46"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_46_46">[46]</a>
        would have to be advanced to the nautch girls: sweetmeats must be
        ordered: tobacco,
        <i lang="bn">ganja</i>,
        and liquor all had to be
        procured for the occasion; and for these preliminary arrangements he had
        no money at his disposal. In such anxious thoughts Matilall was wrapped
        when Bancharam and Thakchacha arrived. After exchanging a few remarks,
        they said to Matilall: <q>Well, sir! why this melancholy? It makes us
        quite sad to see it. At your age you should be always lively and
        cheerful. Why this anxiety? Fie! be merry.</q>

        Affected almost to tears by this sweet language, Matilall told them all
        that was in his mind. Bancharam said: <q>Why be so anxious on that
        account? Are we mere grass-cutters that we cannot help you out of a
        difficulty? What brought us to see you today was a splendid idea that
        has occurred to us. Within a year you will have paid off all your
        liabilities, and be able to enjoy yourself at your leisure, and your
        sons and your grandsons in their turn will be able to play the rich
        man on a grand scale. Is it not written in the
        <i lang="bn">shástras</i>?:—</q>
</p>
<div class="poem">
<div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><q>Lakshmi, fair goddess,</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>Of commerce is queen.</q><br/></span>
</div>
</div>
<p>
<q>There is a fortune to be made in trade: by it people spring to
        sudden affluence. Why, look at the numbers of people I have
        known,— many of them of very low origin and blessed with no
        brains to speak of,— who have sprang to sudden importance by
        trade! It makes me quite envious to see them. What troubles me is that
        we are wasting all our energies with only one string to our bow. This
        is not as it should be!

        ‘Chandi Charan gathers cow-dung while Ram is riding on
        horseback<a id="FNanchor_47_47"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_47_47">[47]</a>.’</q>
</p>
<p>
<span class="stage-direction">Matilall.—</span>
        Ah, a brilliant notion! I am daily in need of money. Does
        commerce flourish in the bazar, or does it grow in an office? Is it
        merely the buying and selling that goes on in a
        sweetmeat-maker’s shop? My business will lack all importance
        unless I am to be the chief agent of some English merchant.
    </p>
<p>
<span class="stage-direction">Bancharam.—</span>
        You need only sit at home on the
        <i lang="bn">guddee</i>,
        sir! The burden of business will devolve entirely upon us. A Mr. John,
        a friend of one Mr. Butler, has but recently arrived from England. You
        might make some arrangement with him and become his agent: he is a very
        shrewd business man.
    </p>
<p>
<span class="stage-direction">Thakchacha.—</span>
        I shall be with you to help you, whether it be the courts
        of law or the Treasury Office, or the police department, or commerce.
        They none of them have any secrets for me: I know all the ins and outs
        of them! My Shena also understands all these matters. Ah, sir, it is a
        grief to me that my great capacity for business has been lying dormant
        all this time! it has never been roused into action or had full play. I
        am not the kind of man to sit idle: if I find an enemy in my way, I
        promptly assault him and put him to the rout. If I once put my hand to
        business I shall get on like the famous Rustem Jol.
    </p>
<p>
<span class="stage-direction">Matilall.—</span>
        And who is Shena, Thakchacha?
    </p>
<p>
<span class="stage-direction">Thakchacha.—</span>
        Shena is your humble servant’s wife. How can I possibly
        extol her qualities adequately? Her beauty is as the beauty of Zuleeka,
        and her understanding as that of an angel of light.
    </p>
<p>
<span class="stage-direction">Bancharam.—</span>
        Enough of this talk for the present: let us get to business.
        We shall have to advance Mr. John ten or fifteen thousand rupees, but
        there need be no risk. I have arranged to find this money by mortgaging
        the Kotalpore Taluk. I will deposit the necessary deeds in Mr. Butler’s
        office: the expense will not be very great; it will come to between
        four and five hundred rupees. Besides this, you have to give five
        hundred rupees to the money-lender’s
        <i lang="bn">amlah</i>. Ah, those
        <i lang="bn">amlahs</i>!
        they are our mortal enemies: our enterprise may all come to nought if
        they put any obstacle in our way. When we have smoothed away all the
        preliminary difficulties, we shall find the auspices favourable for our
        success. I am just going off to Calcutta with Thakchacha. I have a
        variety of commissions to execute, and shall be in a fever till I have
        finished them. Do you, sir, for your part, ascertain from friend Tarka
        Siddhanta a propitious day for the commencement of the enterprise, and
        then come at once; under the auspices of Durga, to my house in Sonagaji.
        You will have to remain a few days in Calcutta; but only a short time
        will elapse before, like Chand Sadagar, you will return to Vaidyabati
        ghât with seven<a id="FNanchor_48_48"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_48_48">[48]</a>
        vessels laden with wealth, drums beating, young men and
        old men, women and children, as they gaze on the splendour of your
        return, greeting you with blessings. Oh, may the day speedily dawn!
    </p>
<p>
        Bancharam then proceeded on his way, and took Thakchacha with him.
    </p>
<p>
        Matilall reported the whole of the conversation to his companions. They
        danced with delight when they heard it. Want of means had almost
        entirely put an end to their fun. Now there was every chance of the
        treasury being replenished. Mangovinda at once hurried off to the
        <i lang="bn">tol</i>
        of Tarka Siddhanta; he was puffing and blowing with his exertions when
        he arrived there. Tarka Siddhanta was a very old man. He was taking
        snuff, and alternately sneezing and coughing; his pupils were ranged all
        round him; in front of him lay a Sanscrit work written on a palm leaf.
        Every now and then he would glance at the manuscript through his
        spectacles, then give out a passage to his pupils and explain it to
        them. The cow of the establishment had not had its rack supplied, there
        being a scarcity of straw, and it lowed continuously. From inside the
        house the wife of the old pandit was screaming: <q>The old man is rapidly
        losing his wits: he does nothing, all day and all night but mind his
        books: he never once turns his attention to household matters.</q> His
        pupils, hearing all this, nudged each other and winked. Tarka Siddhanta
        flew into a towering rage, and taking hold of a stick, with which to
        keep the old women quiet, was just getting up very slowly and
        deliberately, when suddenly Mangovinda caught hold of him, and said:
        <q>Oh, Tarka Siddhanta, respected sir! we are all going into trade. Do
        ascertain for us an auspicious day.</q> Tarka Siddhanta got up in great
        wrath, his face distorted with passion. <q>A curse light upon you and your
        trade; could you find no other time but when I had just risen from my
        seat, to call me behind my
        back<a id="FNanchor_49_49"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_49_49">[49]</a>?
        So you will go into trade, eh? May you and your father’s house come to
        ruin, bad luck to you. You want to know what day will be auspicious, eh?
        When you cease vexing people as you do, they will have their
        <i lang="bn">Ganga Snan</i>
        in peace. Off, away with you this minute! The day you clear out of this
        will be the auspicious day.</q> Somewhat disconcerted by the old man’s
        abuse, Mangovinda went and told his companions that the next day would
        be auspicious.
    </p>
<p>
        Sounds of preparation straightway arose, and there was all the bustle
        that attends arrangements for a festival: it was the
        <i lang="bn">Udjog Parba</i>
        over again. While one of the party fixed the wire for playing the
        <i lang="bn">sitar</i>
        on his fore-finger, another tested the
        <i lang="bn">baya</i>,
        tapping it to see whether it had any pitch or not: another examined the
        <i lang="bn">tabala</i>:
        another tightened the rings round the drums: another put resin on a
        fiddle and tested the strings: another packed up the clothes: another
        prepared small parcels of tobacco,
        <i lang="bn">ganja</i>
        and other stimulants, along with bundles of firewood: another selected,
        with great care, balls of opium and sweetmeats: another examined the
        different purchases to see whether they were of correct weight. All day
        and all night the bustle and noise of preparation went on without any
        diminution. It had got about in the village that the young Babus were
        about to go into trade, and next day, when all the shopkeepers of the
        place, the poorer sort of people, and the beggars and loafers, were out
        in the roads looking out for them to pass, they came swaggering down to the
        <i lang="bn">ghât</i>,
        like so many wild elephants. There were a number of pandits at the
        <i lang="bn">ghât</i>
        engaged in their early morning devotions: hearing the stir and bustle,
        theylooked behind them, and at once shook with fright. Seeing them so
        terrified, the Babus only jeered at them and laughed. Then they showered
        upon them Ganges mud and brick-bats, and insulted them generally, and
        the Brahmans, interrupted in this rude way at their devotions, went
        their way, calling upon Krishna in their distress. The young men having
        embarked on board a boat, all caught up a popular love-song, screaming
        it out at the top of their voices. The boat glided quickly down stream
        on the ebb. The Babus could not keep still for a moment; one would get
        on the deck of the cabin; another would work the rudder; one would pull
        an oar, and another strike a light with a flint. They had not gone very
        far when they met with Dhanamala. Now Dhanamala never cared what he said
        to any one: he called out to them: <q>Having reduced a whole village
        to ashes, are you now going to set the Ganges on fire?</q>

        To which they angrily replied: <q>Shut up, you idiot! Do you not know
        that we are all going into business?</q>

        Dhanamala’s only answer to this was:— <q>If you ever become
        traders, may your business come to grief! may it perish with a halter
        on its neck!</q>
</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/>
<p> <span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_150">[150]</a></span><br/> </p>
<p> </p> <p> </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
