<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a id="CHAPTER_XVIII"/>CHAPTER XVIII.<br/>
<small>MOZOOMDAR ON THE MARRIAGE.</small></h2>
<p>
        THE sun was just setting: gloriously beautiful was the western sky with
        its many and varied tints. On land and water the sun’s tremulous light
        seemed gently smiling, while a soft breeze blew: everything was calm
        and inviting. On such an evening as this, a number of young men were
        thronging with loud and boisterous shouts down the main street of
        Vaidyabati. They knocked against the passers-by, smashing the things
        they were carrying, hustling them, throwing their baskets away and
        robbing them of their supplies of food. They sang continuously at the
        top of their voices, imitating the howls of dogs at the same time. On
        either side of the road people fled, calling for assistance and
        protection, trembling, and bewildered with fear. Like a storm sweeping
        down from all four quarters of the compass at once, with the roar of
        heavy rain, this whirlwind came tearing and raging past. And who are
        these mighty men? Who indeed but those models of virtue, Matilall and
        his companions? — King Nala and Yudhishthira over again! They are far
        too great personages to pay heed to anyone: so full of self-importance
        and of pride are their heads that they are as unsteady in their gait as
        men drunk with much wine. They have it all their own way as they come
        swaggering along.
    </p>
<p>
        Just then an old man from the village, one Mozoomdar, his solitary lock
        waving in the breeze, a stick in one hand and some vegetables in the
        other, approached them, leaning heavily on his stick. They all
        surrounded him and began to amuse themselves at his expense. Mozoomdar
        was a little hard of hearing, and when they said to him: <q>Come, tell
        us, how is your wife?</q> he replied: <q>I shall have to roast them
        before I can eat them.</q>

        They laughed heartily, and Mozoomdar would have liked to slip away, but
        there was no escape for him. The young Babus seized him, and making him
        sit on the bank of the river, gave him a pipe of tobacco, saying to him:

        ‘Come, Mozoomdar, tell us all about the row at the marriage of the
        master of Vaidyabati: you are bit of a poet: it is a pleasure to us
        to listen to you. If you do not tell us, we shall not let you off, and
        we shall go and tell your wife that you have met with an untimely
        death.’

        Mozoomdar saw that he was in a bad way, and that there was no
        getting out of it unless he complied; so, making the best of a bad job,
        he set his stick and vegetables on the ground and commenced his
        narrative.
    </p>
<p>
<q>It is a pitiable tale that I have to tell. What an experience has it
        been to me, accompanying the master! It was close on evening when the
        boat drew up at the Barnagore
        <i lang="bn">Ghât</i>.
        Some women had come to the riverside to draw water: as soon as they
        saw the master, they veiled their faces slightly and began to chatter
        hard to each other, laughing quietly the while.

        ‘Ha what a lovely bridegroom!’ they cried, ‘what a
        sweet <i lang="bn">champac</i>
        flower for a lucky girl to fondle in her braided hair!’

        Said one of them: ‘Old or young, whichever he may be, the girl
        will have no difficulty in seeing him with her eyes: that of itself is
        something.  May the wretched lot that has befallen me befall no one else:
        married at the age of six, I have never even set eyes on my husband. I
        have heard that he has married some fifty wives, and is over eighty
        years of age; and though he is such a wretched tottering old man, he
        never makes any objection to marry if he is only well paid for it.
        Sorely some great crimes must have been committed in former births, or
        else daughters would never be born into a Kulin’s family!’

        ‘My dear,’ said another woman to her, ‘you have
        finished drawing water now: come along, you ought not to gossip like
        this when you come to the riverside. Why, your husband is alive, whereas
        the man I was married to was actually dying, with his feet in the
        Ganges, when the ceremony of marriage was performed! What possible good
        will it do to discuss the religious duties of Kulin Brahmans? The
        secrets of the heart are best kept locked up in the breast.’</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>It grieved me to listen to the talk of the women, and the words of
        Beni Babu, which he spoke at the time of our departure, recurred to my
        mind.  Then on landing at the Barnagore
        <i lang="bn">ghât</i>,
        there was a good deal of trouble in trying to get a
        <i lang="bn">palki</i>,
        but not a single bearer was to be had, and the time for the ceremony
        was fast slipping away. We had to proceed as best we could. After a good
        deal of floundering about in the mud, we reached the house of the
        bride’s father. How can I describe to you the figure that the master
        presented after he had tumbled down in the road? we had only to put him
        upon an ox, for him to have appeared a veritable Mahadeva, and we might
        have presented Thakchacha and Bakreswar as Nandi and Bhringi in
        attendance upon him. I had heard rumours that there would be a large
        distribution of presents, but on getting up to the great hall, I saw
        that there was to be nothing of the sort: it was all a delusion, and
        another illustration of the old proverb,— ‘Sand has fallen
        into the <i lang="bn">goor</i>.’
        Thakchacha, seeing his hopes destroyed, was glaring around him
        everywhere, and strutting insolently about. I could not help smiling to
        myself, but I thought it would be safer not to express my real
        sentiments. The bridegroom had meanwhile withdrawn for the ceremonies
        performed by the women of the family. The women, old and young, all
        surrounded him, their ornaments jingling as they moved about They were
        horrified when they saw the bridegroom. During the performance of the
        ceremony, when bride and bridegroom gaze into each other’s eyes,
        he was obliged to put his spectacles on: the women all burst out laughing
        and began to make fun of him. He flew into a passion and called out,

        ‘Thakchacha! Thakchacha!’ Thakchacha was just on the point
        of running into the women’s apartments, when the people belonging
        to the party of the bride’s father got him on the ground.
        Bancharam Babu was pugnacious, and got well thrashed. Bakreswar Babu was
        hustled about so that he resembled a pigeon with swollen neck. When I
        saw the disturbance, I left the bridegroom’s party and joined that
        of the bride.  What became of everybody in the end I cannot say, but
        Thakchacha had to return home in a
        <i lang="bn">dooly</i>.
        You all know the saying—
        ‘In avarice is sin, and in sin death.’

        Now listen to the poetry I have composed</q>:—
    </p>
<div class="poem">
<div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Any counsel his parasite pours in his
                ears,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">Baburam, the old dotard, as gospel
                reveres.<br/></span>
<span class="i0">Still dreaming of riches by day and by
                night,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">No thought ever stirs him of wrong or of
                right.<br/></span>
<span class="i0">In saving and getting he squanders his
                life,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">And lately it struck him, <q>I’ll marry a
                    wife!</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>Fie! you’re old,</q> cry his friends, <q>and
                    what can you need more?</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>You’ve your wife and your children, with
                    grandsons in store?</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0">But their kindly advice for themselves they may
                keep<br/></span>
<span class="i0">At a trifle like bigamy, fortunes go
                cheap!<br/></span>
<span class="i0">So all in a flurry he orders a boat,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">And with kinsmen and servants is shortly
                afloat.<br/></span>
<span class="i0">Good Beni’s remonstrance he haughtily
                spurns,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">Who home to his rice unrewarded
                returns.<br/></span>
<span class="i0">Becharam is disgusted, and toddles
                away:<br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>Thakchacha, you scoundrel!</q> was all he
                could say.<br/></span>
<span class="i0">But the Barnagore women such volleys of
                jeers<br/></span>
<span class="i0">Exchange through their <i lang="bn">chudders</i>
                where’er he appears,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">That the bridegroom gets nervous, and asks in
                affright,<br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>Can I really be such a ridiculous
                    sight?</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>Is some further expenditure needed,
                    alas?</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0">And anxiously studies his face in the
                glass.<br/></span>
<span class="i0">Reassured of his beauty, and freed from
                alarm<br/></span>
<span class="i0">He swaggers along, upon Thakchacha’s
                arm.<br/></span>
<span class="i0">But scarce is he rid of that terrible
                doubt,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">When in mud like a pumpkin he’s tumbling
                about;<br/></span>
<span class="i0">And his friends in the mire as they
                flounder half-dead,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">See the Halls, not of Hymen but Pluto
                ahead.<br/></span>
<span class="i0">And indeed it turns out, when he’s taken the
                yoke<a id="FNanchor_33_33"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_33_33">[33]</a>,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">That his vision connubial has vanished in
                smoke;<br/></span>
<span class="i0">For the cluster of pearls he was hoping to
                claim,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">And the gold and the silver, were nought but a
                name!<br/></span>
<span class="i0">Thakchacha, outwitted, with furious
                scowl<br/></span>
<span class="i0">Glares round him, scarce able to stifle a
                howl.<br/></span>
<span class="i0">And oh, when its time for the bridegroom to
                enter<br/></span>
<span class="i0">The ladies’
                domain<a id="FNanchor_34_34"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_34_34">[34]</a>,
                of what mirth he’s the centre!<br/></span>
<span class="i0">Every bangle a-jangle, around him they
                flutter,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">And flout him and scout him till scarce he can
                stutter.<br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>This pot-bellied dotard to wed with a
                    baby!</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>This bloated old octogenarian
                    gaby!</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>With a head like a gourd, not a tooth to his
                    gum!</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>’Tis an overgrown ogre in spectacles
                    come!</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>And the child, the sweet blossom, our jewel
                    so rare!</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>Ah, shame on the Kulins, such deeds who can
                    dare!</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0">While, shrinking and blinking and all of a
                shiver,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">The bridegroom, a captive whom none will
                deliver,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">Cries feebly as one in the direst of
                pain,<br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>To the rescue, Thakchacha!</q> again and
                again.<br/></span>
<span class="i0">That hero leaps in at the piteous
                sound,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">But is seized by the <i lang="bn">durwans</i> and
                hurled to the ground.<br/></span>
<span class="i0">The remains of his beard he may rescue
                to-day,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">But a terrible hiding’s his share of the
                prey.<br/></span>
<span class="i0">The guests, who consider it risky to
                stay,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">Have other engagements, and hasten
                away.<br/></span>
<span class="i0">Your servant, the tumult increasing still
                more,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">Not without some temerity, made for the
                door,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">And retired, with a fortitude second to
                none.<br/></span>
<span class="i0">All hail to you, masters! my story is
                done.<br/></span>
</div>
</div>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/>
<p> <span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_125">[125]</a></span><br/> </p>
<p> </p> <p> </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
