<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a id="CHAPTER_I"/>CHAPTER I.<br/>
<small>MATILALL AT HOME.</small></h2>
<p>
        BABURAM BABU, a resident of Vaidyabati, was a man of large experience in
        business affairs: he was famous for his long service in the Revenue
        and Criminal Courts. Now to walk uprightly without taking bribes when
        engaged in the public service, is not a very long-established custom.
        Baburam Babu’s procedure was in accordance with the old style,
        and being skilful at his work, he had succeeded, by servility and
        cringing, in imposing on his superior officers; as a consequence of
        which he had acquired considerable wealth within a very short time. In
        this country a man’s reputation keeps pace with the increase of
        his riches or with his advancement: learning and character have not
        anything like the same respect paid to them. There had been a time when
        Baburam Babu’s position had been a very inferior one, and when
        only a few individuals in his village had paid him any attention; but
        later, as he came into the possession of fine buildings, gardens,
        estates, and a good deal of influence in many ways, he found himself
        with a host of friends as his followers and advisers. Whenever during
        his intervals of leisure he went to his house, his reception-room would
        be crowded with people. It is always the case that when a man has a
        sudden accession of wealth there is a rush of people to him, just as
        the shop of a sweetmeat seller will become full of flies as long as
        there are sweetmeats to be had. At whatever time you might visit
        Baburam Babu’s house you would always find people with him: rich
        and poor, they would all sit round and flatter him, the more
        intelligent among them in indirect fashion only, the lesser folk
        outright and unblushingly, agreeing with everything he said. After
        some time spent in the way we have described, Baburam Babu took his
        pension, and remained at home occupied in the management of his
        estates and in trade.
    </p>
<p>
        Now in this world, entire happiness is the lot of hardly any one, and it
        is rare to find intelligence displayed in all the concerns of life.
        Baburam Babu had turned his attention solely to amassing wealth: the
        questions which had alone exercised his mind had been how to increase
        his resources, how to make the whole village aware of his importance, so
        that all might salute him properly, and how to celebrate his religious
        festivals on a larger scale than those of his neighbours. He had a son
        and two daughters: being himself a descendant of the great
        Kulin<a id="FNanchor_1_1"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_1_1">[1]</a>,
        Balaram Thakur, he had, with a view to the preservation of his caste,
        married the two girls at great expense almost immediately after their
        birth; but their husbands, being Kulins, had taken to themselves wives
        in a number of places, and would not so much as peep into the house of
        their father-in-law of Vaidyabati, except on condition of receiving a
        handsome remuneration for their trouble.
    </p>
<p>
        His son, Matilall, having been indulged in every possible way from his
        boyhood, was exceedingly self-willed; at times, he would say to his
        father:
        <q>Father, I want to catch hold of the moon!</q>
<q>Father, I want to eat a cannon-ball!</q>

        Now and then he would roar and cry, so that all the neighbours would
        say: <q>We cannot get any sleep owing to that dreadful boy.</q>

        Having been so spoilt by his parents, the boy would not tolerate the
        bare idea of going to school, and thus it was that the duty of teaching
        him devolved upon the house clerk. On his very first visit to his
        teacher, Matilall howled aloud, and scratched and bit him. His tutor
        therefore went to the master of the house and said to him:
        <q>Sir, it is quite beyond my power to instruct your
        son<a id="FNanchor_2_2"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_2_2">[2]</a>.</q>

        The master of the house replied: <q>Ah, he is my only darling, my
        Krishna! use flattery and caresses if you will, only do teach him.</q>
</p>
<p>
        Matilall was afterwards induced by means of many stratagems to attend
        school; and when his teacher was leaning up against the wall, nodding
        drowsily, with his legs crossed and a cane in his hand,
        reiterating—

        <q>Write boys, write,</q>

        Matilall would rise from his seat, make contemptuous gestures, and
        dance about the room. The teacher would go on snoring away, ignorant
        of what his pupil was doing, and when he opened his eyes again, Matilall
        would be seated near his writing materials of dry palm-leaves, drawing
        figures of crows and cranes. When later in the afternoon he had
        commenced the repetition lesson, Matilall, amid the confused babel of
        tongues, would utter cries of
        <i lang="bn">Hori Bol</i>,
        and cleverly outwit his teacher by uttering the last letters only of
        the words that were being recited. Occasionally when his teacher was
        napping, he would tickle his nose or throw a live piece of charcoal
        into his lap, and then dart away like an arrow. When the hour for
        refreshment came, he would occasionally get some boy to give the master
        lime and water to drink, pretending that it was buttermilk. The teacher
        saw that the boy was a thorough good-for-nothing, who had made up his
        mind to have nothing more to do with education; so he concluded that as
        the boy had profited naught from all the canings he had had, but only
        learnt the art of playing tricks upon his teacher, it was high time to
        be released from the hands of such a pupil. The master of the house
        however would not hear of it, so he had to have recourse to stratagem.
        The occupation of clerk seemed to him to be better than that of teacher:
        in the latter occupation his wages were two rupees a month besides
        food and clothing, while his gains over and above that would be merely a
        present of rice and a pair of cloths or so at the time of the
        boy’s being first initiated into
        school-life<a id="FNanchor_3_3"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_3_3">[3]</a>:
        on the other hand, in the occupation of a clerk who superintended all
        purchases in the market, there were constant pickings. Revolving such
        thoughts in his mind, he went to the master of the house and told him
        that Matilall’s education was complete so far as his writing was
        concerned, and that he had also been thoroughly taught to keep
        accounts, so far as estate-management was concerned. Baburam Babu
        was overwhelmed with joy on receiving this intelligence, and all
        his neighbours in conclave with him said:

        <q>Why should it not be so? Can a lion’s whelp ever become a
        jackal?</q>
</p>
<p>
        Baburam Babu now thought that he ought to have his son taught the
        rudiments of Sanskrit grammar and a smattering of Persian. Having come
        to this determination, he called the priest who was in charge of the
        family worship, and said:

        <q>You sir! have you any knowledge of grammar?</q>

        This Brahman was the densest of blockheads, but he thought to himself:
        <q>I am now getting only rice and plantains, quite insufficient for me:
        here I see at length a means of making a living.</q>

        So he replied: <q>Yes, sir, I studied grammar for five years
        continuously in the Sanskrit <i lang="bn">Tol</i> of Ishvar Chandra
        Vedanta Vagishwar of Kunnimora. But I have been very unlucky: I have
        gained nothing from all my learning: I am no more than your humble
        servant in spite of it all, and my food is but coarse grain and
        water.</q>

        Baburam Babu thereupon appointed him to teach his son the rudiments of
        Sanskrit grammar from that day. The Brahman, inebriated with hope,
        speedily got by heart a page or two of the
        <i lang="bn">Mugdha Bodh</i>
        Grammar, and set about teaching the boy.
    </p>
<p>
        Thought Matilall to himself:—

        <q> I have escaped from the hands of my old teacher; how am I to get
            rid of this rice-and-plantain-eating old Brahman? I am my father
            and mother’s darling, and whether I can write or not, they
            will say nothing to me.  The only object of learning after all is
            to gain money, and my father has boundless wealth: what then is
            the good of my learning? It is quite enough for me to be able to
            sign my name; besides what will my intimate friends have left to
            do if I take to learning? their occupation in ministering to my
            pleasures will be gone! The present is the time for enjoyment:
            has the pain of learning any attractions for me just now? surely
            none!
        </q>

        Having come to this determination, Matilall thus addressed his
        preceptor:— <q>Old Brahman, if you come here any more to plague
        me with this grammatical rubbish, I will throw away the family idol,
        and with it your last hope of a livelihood; and if you go to my father
        and tell him what I have said to you, I will just drop a brick onto you
        from the roof: then your wife will soon become a widow, and have to
        remove her bracelet from her
        wrist<a id="FNanchor_4_4"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_4_4">[4]</a>.</q>

        The Brahman, distressed by such remarks about his teaching, thought to
        himself: <q>For six months past I have been labouring at the peril of
        my life, and I have not yet been paid anything: the whole occupation
        is one that is most repugnant to my feelings, and I am in constant
        danger of my life. Let me now only get clear of him and I care not what
        happens to me afterwards.</q>

        As the Brahman was revolving all this in his mind, Matilall looked in
        his face and said: <q>Well, what are you in such a brown study about?
        Are you in want of money? Here, take this! But you must go to my
        father, and tell him that I have learned every thing.</q>

        The Brahman accordingly went to the boy’s father and said to him:
        <q>Sir, your Matilall is no common boy! he has a most extraordinary
        memory; he will remember for ever what he may have heard only once.</q>

        There was an astrologer at the time with Baburam, who observed to the
        Babu: <q>There is no necessity for you to give me an introduction to
        Matilall: he is a boy whose birth was at an auspicious moment; if only
        he lives he is bound to become a very great man</q>.
    </p>
<p>
        Baburam Babu next set about searching for a Munshi to teach his son
        Persian. After a long search, the grandfather of Aladi the tailor,
        Habibala Hoshan by name, was appointed to the post on a salary of one
        rupee eight annas a month, together with oil and firewood. The Munshi
        Saheb was a man with toothless gums, a grey beard, and a moustache like
        tow: his eyes would get inflamed whenever he was teaching, and when he
        bade his pupils repeat the letters after him, his face became hideously
        distorted in pronouncing the guttural Persian letters
        <i lang="fa">kaph, gaph, ain, ghain</i>.
        The benefit that Matilall derived from learning Persian was pretty
        much what might have been expected from his possessing no taste
        whatever for the pursuit of knowledge, and having such a preceptor. As
        the Munshi Saheb was one day stooping over his book, repeating the
        maxims of Masnavi in a sing-song manner and keeping time with his hand,
        Matilall seized the opportunity to drop a lighted match from behind
        onto his beard. The poor Munshi’s beard at once flared up,
        crackling as it blazed, upon which Matilall remarked:

        <q>How now, Mussulman? you will not teach me any more after this, I
        expect.</q>

        The Munshi Saheb left speedily, shaking his head and exclaiming
        <q><i lang="fa">Tauba! Tauba!</i></q>

        Then as the pain of the burn intensified, he shrieked: <q>Never, never
        have I seen so mad and wicked a boy as this: of a surety field labour
        in my own country were better than such slavery: it is cruel work
        coming to a place like this!
        <i lang="fa">Tauba! Tauba!</i></q>
</p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_8">[8]</a></span></p>
<p> </p> <p> </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
