<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a id="CHAPTER_XXI"/>CHAPTER XXI.<br/>
<small>MATILALL ON THE GUDDEE.</small></h2>
<p>
        PEOPLE did not think much of Baburam Babu’s
        <i lang="bn">shraddha</i>.
        The rain, as the proverb has it, was out of all proportion to the
        thunder.  Oil fell on a good many heads that were oiled already, while
        heads that were dry and destitute of oil only got cracked. Their
        disputation was all the profit that the pandits got. The uneducated
        city Brahmans had it all their own way. The harsh discipline of all
        kinds to which pandits subject themselves, creates in them a
        stubbornness of nature: they follow their own opinions and do not
        agree with all and everything they find. The Brahmans of a lower order,
        <i lang="fr"> habitúes</i>
        of the city, suit their conversation to the minds of the Babus: in
        the words of the proverb, they adapt their strokes to the quality
        of the wood. If it suits them to be Gosains, Gosains they can be;
        and the characters they can assume are as varied as the ingredients of
        a curry mixture; is it surprising then that they generally get the
        best of everything? The managers of the
        <i lang="bn">shraddha</i>
        had taken every precaution to fill their own pockets: they were keen
        chiefly on their own share of the gifts: what did it matter to them
        whether the pandits or the poor received anything worth mentioning?
        There was a great flourish of trumpets over things that would be matter
        of public observation and could not be avoided, but equal consideration
        was not shown throughout. Management such as that is a mere playing to
        the gallery.
    </p>
<p>
        The stir which the
        <i lang="bn">shraddha</i>
        had caused gradually died away.
    </p>
<p>
        Bancharam and Thakchacha took to flattering Matilall to an extraordinary
        extent, and Matilall, being of a very weak nature, was enthralled by
        their seductive language, and thought that he had no other friends on
        earth like them. With a view to increasing his importance they one day
        said to him:— <q>Sir, you are now master: it behoves you to take
        your seat on the
        <i lang="bn">guddee</i>
        of the master now in heaven: how otherwise will his dignity be
        maintained?</q>

        Matilall was highly delighted at the idea. As a child he had heard bits
        of the <i lang="bn">Ramayana</i>
        and <i lang="bn">Mahabharata</i><a id="FNanchor_42_42"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_42_42">[42]</a>,
        and so it occurred to him that he would be seated on the
        <i lang="bn">guddee</i>
        with the same pomp and circumstance with which Yudhishthira and Ram
        Chandra were anointed to the throne of their ancestors. Bancharam and
        Thakchacha saw that Matilall’s face shone again with delight at the
        suggestion they had made, so the next day they settled on a date for the
        ceremony, and calling together all his kinsmen and friends, seated
        Matilall upon his father’s
        <i lang="bn">guddee</i>.
        In the village the report got about that Matilall had attained to this
        honour: The news soon spread: it was told in the market-place, in the
        bazar, at the
        <i lang="bn">ghât</i>,
        and in the fields. A choleric old Brahman, when he heard it remarked,
        <q>Oh, he has attained the
        <i lang="bn">guddee</i>,
        has he? What a fine expression! And whose
        <i lang="bn">guddee</i>,
        pray? That of the great
        Jagat Sett<a id="FNanchor_43_43"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_43_43">[43]</a>,
        or of Devi Dass Balmukunda?</q>
</p>
<p>
        When a man of sound sense attains to a high position or to great wealth,
        he is not liable to be lightly swayed hither and thither; whereas a man
        who lacks solidity of character, should he attain to a higher position
        than he is accustomed to, is as unstable as the waters of a flood. And
        so it proved with Matilall. Day and night, unceasing as a torrent, arose
        the hubbub of boisterous amusement. His companions did not diminish; on
        the contrary, their number daily increased, rapidly as the fabulous
        <i lang="bn">Raktabij</i><a id="FNanchor_44_44"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_44_44">[44]</a>.
        Was there anything surprising in this? When rice is scattered there is
        no lack of crows, and a whole army of ants will come together at the
        scent of molasses.
    </p>
<p>
        Bakreswar Baba visited Matilall one day to try and get something out of
        him, and used all his arts to fascinate Matilall by his talk. But
        Matilall had been acquainted from his boyhood with Bakreswar’s crafty
        cajolery, and so he gave him this answer:— <q>Sir, you have
        destroyed all my chances in the next world by the partiality and favour
        you showed me in the past. I never failed to give you enough presents
        when I was a boy: why do you keep bothering me now?</q>

        Bakreswar went away with his head bent low, muttering to himself.
        Matilall was now as one inebriated with pleasure: though Bancharam
        and Thakchacha went occasionally to see him, he would have little to
        do with them in the way of business. Owing to the power-of-attorney he
        had given them, they had entire command over everything, and now and
        again they made the Babu a liberal advance, but nothing in the way of
        detailed accounts of expenditure was forthcoming from them.
    </p>
<p>
        As for the rest of his family, he never took the slightest notice of
        them: he never even troubled himself to enquire where they were or
        where they went. The ladies endured much hardship on this account, but
        Matilall by his riotous living had become so lost to all sense of shame
        that he paid no heed to the reports that reached him on the subject. To
        have to mourn for a husband is the greatest affliction that a faithful
        wife is called on to endure. It is some alleviation to her in her
        trouble, if she have good children; but if on the contrary they
        disappoint her it adds intensity to the bitterness of her grief, as
        melted butter thrown upon fire. Matilall’s evil behaviour was a
        terrible grief to his mother, but she never spoke openly of it. One
        day, however, after long deliberation, she approached him and
        said:— <q>My child, what was to be my lot, that has been: now,
        for the few remaining days that I have to live, let me not have to
        listen to this evil report of you. I cannot lend my ears to
        people’s abuse of you. Have some little regard for your younger
        brother, your elder sister, and your stepmother: they are not getting
        half enough to eat. Ah, my child, I ask nothing for myself: I lay no
        farther burden upon you.</q>

        To these words of his mother, Matilall, his eyes inflamed with passion,
        replied: <q>What? will you be always chattering and abusing me? Do you
        not know that I am now master in my own house? What is this evil report
        about me?</q>

        As he said this, he struck his mother a blow on the face and pushed her
        down. She got up from the ground after a short interval, and wiping
        away her tears with the border of her
        <i lang="bn">sari</i>,
        said to her son: <q>Ah, my son! I never heard of children beating their
        mothers before, but it has been my destiny for this to happen to me. I
        have nothing further to say: I only pray that all may be well with
        you.</q>

        Next day, without saying a word to any one, his mother left the house
        with her daughter.
    </p>
<p>
        Since the death of his father, Ramlall had made many efforts to be on
        good terms with his brother, but had had to suffer many indignities.
        Matilall was in constant anxiety lest he should have to give up the half
        of the property, and so be unable to continue his role of the grandee;
        and as life would be but a sorry farce if he had to give up that role,
        he must, he considered, take the necessary steps to mulct his brother of
        his share. Having settled on this plan, by the advice of course of
        Bancharam and Thakchacha, he forbade Ramlall the house. Thus shut out
        from the home of his fathers, Ramlall, after long deliberation, without
        having had an interview with his mother, sister, or any one, proceeded
        to another part of the country.
    </p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/>
<p> <span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_144">[144]</a></span><br/> </p>
<p> </p> <p> </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
