<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a id="CHAPTER_VI"/>CHAPTER VI.<br/>
<small>MATILALL’S MOTHER AND SISTERS.</small></h2>
<p>
        THE Vaidyabati house was all astir with preparations for a religious
        ceremonial. The sun had not risen when Shridhar Bhattacharjea, Ram
        Gopal Charamani and other Brahman priests, set to work repeating
        <i lang="bn">mantras</i>.
        All were employed upon something: one was offering the sacred basil to
        the deity: some were busy picking the leaves of the jessamine: others
        humming and beating time on their cheeks. One was remarking:

        <q>I am no Brahman if good fortune does not attend the sacrifices;</q>
        and another, <q>If things turn out inauspiciously, I will abandon my
        sacred thread.</q>

        The whole household was busily engaged, but not a member of it was happy
        in mind. The mistress of the house was sitting at an open window and
        calling in her distress upon her guardian deity: her infant boy lay
        near her, playing with a toy and tossing his little limbs in the air.
        Every now and again she glanced in the direction of the child, and
        said to herself:

        <q>Ah my darling, I cannot say what kind of destiny awaits you! To be
        childless is a single sorrow and anxiety: multiplied a hundred-fold
        is the misery that comes with children. How is a mother’s mind
        distracted if her child has the slightest complaint! she will cheerfully
        sacrifice her life in order to get him well again: so long as her babe
        is ill, all capacity for food and sleep deserts her: day and night to
        her are alike. If a child who has caused her so much sorrow grows up
        good, she feels her work accomplished; but if the contrary be the case,
        a living death is hers: she takes no interest in anything in the world
        and cares not to show herself in the neighbourhood. The haughty face
        grows wan and pinched: in her inmost heart, like Sita, she gives
        expression to this wish:

        ‘Oh, Earth, Earth, open, and let me hide myself within thy
        bosom!’

        The good God knows what trouble I have taken to make Matilall a
        man: my young one has now learned to fly, and heavy is my chastisement.
        How it grieves me to hear of such evil conduct: I am almost heartbroken
        with sorrow and chagrin. I have not told my husband all: he might have
        gone mad had he heard all. Away with these thoughts! I can endure them
        no longer: I am but a weak woman.  What will such laments avail me now?
        what must be, must be.</q>
</p>
<p>
        A maid-servant came in at that moment and took the child away, and the
        mistress of the house engaged in her daily religious duties.
    </p>
<p>
        Man’s mind is so constituted that it cannot readily forget any
        particular matter it may be absorbed in, to attend to other affairs in
        hand. When therefore she tried to perform her usual devotions, she
        found herself unable to do so. Again and again she set herself to
        fix her attention on the
        <i lang="bn">mantras</i>
        she had to repeat, but her mind kept wandering: the thought of
        Matilall surged up like a strong and irresistible flood. At one time
        she fancied that the orders for his imprisonment had been passed, and
        her imagination depicted him as already in fetters, and being led
        off to jail: she even thought she saw his father standing near him,
        his head bowed down in woe, weeping bitterly; and again she almost
        fancied that her son was come to see her, and was saying to her:

        <q>Mother, forgive me: what is past cannot now be mended, but I will
        never again cause you such trouble and sorrow.</q>

        She then began to dream of some great calamity as about to befall
        Matilall,— that he would be transported perhaps for life. When
        these phantoms of her imagination had left her, she began to say to
        herself:

        <q>Why, it is now high noon! can I have been dreaming? No, surely this
        is no dream! I must have seen a vision. I wish I could tell why my mind
        is so distracted to-day!</q>

        With these words she laid herself silently down on the ground, and wept
        bitterly.
    </p>
<p>
        Her two daughters, Mokshada and Pramada, were busy drying their hair on
        the roof, and Mokshada was saying to her sister: <q>Why sister Pramada,
        you have not half combed your hair, and how dry it is too! But it must
        be so, for it is ages since a drop of oil fell upon it. It is just the
        use of oil and water that keeps people in good health: to bathe once
        a month, and without using oil, would be bad for any one. But why are
        you so wrapped in thought? anxiety and trouble are making you as thin
        as a string.</q>
</p>
<p>
<span class="stage-direction">Pramada.—</span>
        Ah, my sister, how can I help thinking? Cannot you
        understand it all? Our father brought the son of a Kulin Brahmin here
        when I was a mere child and married me to him. I only heard about this
        when I was grown up. Considering the number of the different places
        where he has contracted marriage, and considering his personal
        character too, I have no wish to see his face: I would rather
        not have a husband at all than such a one.
    </p>
<p>
<span class="stage-direction">Mokshada.—</span>
        Hush, my dear! you must not say that. It is an advantage to a woman to
        have a husband alive, whether his character be bad or good.
    </p>
<p>
<span class="stage-direction">Pramada.—</span>
        Listen then to what I have to tell you. Last year, when I was suffering
        from intermittent fever and had been lying long days and nights on my
        bed, too weak to rise, my husband came one day to the house. From the
        time of my earliest impressions, I had never seen what a husband was
        like: my idea was that there was no treasure a woman could possess like
        a husband, and I thought that if he only came and sat with me for a few
        moments and spoke to me, my pain would be alleviated. But, my sister you
        will not believe me when I say it! he came to my bedside, and said:

        <q>You are my lawful wife, I married you sixteen years ago: I have come
        to see you now because I am in need of money, and will go away again
        directly: I have told your father that he has cheated me: come, give
        me that bracelet off your wrist!</q> I told him that I would first ask
        my mother, and would do what she bade me.  Thereupon he pulled the
        bracelet off my wrist by brute force; and when I struggled to prevent
        his doing so, he gave me a kick and left me. I fainted away, and did not
        recover till mother came and fanned me.
    </p>
<p>
<span class="stage-direction">Mokshada.—</span>
        Oh my dear sister Pramada, your story brings tears into my eyes. But
        consider, you still have a husband living: I have not even that.
    </p>
<p>
<span class="stage-direction">Pramada.—</span>
        A fine husband indeed, my sister! Happily for me, I once spent some time
        with my uncle, and learned to read and write and to do a little fancy
        work with my needle; so by constant work during the day and by a little
        occasional reading, writing or sewing, I keep my trouble hidden. If I
        sit idle for any time, and begin to think, my heart burns with
        indignation.
    </p>
<p>
<span class="stage-direction">Mokshada.—</span>
        What else can it do? Ah, it is because of the many sins committed by us
        in previous births that we are suffering as we are! It is by plenty of
        hard work that our bodies and minds retain their vigour: idleness only
        causes evil thoughts and evil imaginations and even disease to get a
        stronger hold upon us: it was uncle that told me that. I have done all
        I can to soften the pains of widowhood. I always reflect that everything
        is in God’s hands: reliance upon Him is the real secret of life.
        My dear sister, if you so constantly ponder on your grief, you will be
        overwhelmed in the ocean of anxiety: it is an ocean that has no shore.
        What good can possibly result from so much brooding? Just do all your
        religious and secular duties as well as you can: honour our father and
        mother in everything: attend to the welfare of our two brothers:
        nourish and cherish any children they may have, and they will be as your
        own.
    </p>
<p>
<span class="stage-direction">Pramada.—</span>
        Ah my sister, what you say is indeed true, but then our elder brother
        has gone altogether astray. He is given over to vicious ways and vicious
        companions; and as his disposition has changed for the worse, so his
        affection for his parents and for us has lessened. Ah, the affection
        that brothers have for their sisters is not one-hundredth part of the
        affection that sisters have for their brothers! In their devotion to
        their brothers, sisters will even risk their lives; but brothers always
        think that they will get on much better if they can only be rid of
        their sisters! We are Matilall’s elder sisters: if he comes near
        us at all, he may perhaps make himself agreeable for a short time, and
        we may congratulate ourselves upon it; but then have no any influence
        whatever upon his conduct?
    </p>
<p>
<span class="stage-direction">Mokshada.—</span>
        All brothers are not like that. There are brothers who
        regard their elder sisters as they would their mother, and their
        younger sisters as they would a daughter. I am speaking the truth:
        there are brothers who look upon their sisters in the same
        light as they do their brothers: they are unhappy unless they
        are free to converse with them; and if they fall into any
        danger, they risk their lives to save them.
    </p>
<p>
<span class="stage-direction">Pramada.—</span>
        That is very true, but it is our lot to have a brother just in keeping
        with our unhappy destiny. Alas, there is no such thing as happiness in
        this world!
    </p>
<p>
        At this moment, a maid-servant came to tell them her mistress was crying:
        the two sisters rushed downstairs as soon as they heard it.
    </p>
<p>
        It was a fine moonlight evening, the moon shedding her radiance over the
        breadth of the Ganges. A gentle breeze was diffusing the sweet fragrance
        of the wild jungle flowers; the waves danced merrily in the moonlight:
        the birds in a neighbouring grove were calling to each other in their
        varied notes. Beni Babu was seated at the Deonagaji Ghât, looking about
        him and singing snatches of some up-country song on the loves of Krishna
        and Radha. He was completely absorbed in his music and was beating time
        to it, when suddenly he heard somebody behind him calling his name and
        echoing his song. Turning round, he saw Becharam Babu of Bow Bazar:
        he at once rose, and invited his guest to take a seat.
    </p>
<p>
        Becharam opened the conversation. <q>Ah! Beni, my friend! those were
        home truths you told Baburam Babu to-day. I have been invited to your
        village: and as I was so pleased with what I saw of you the other day,
        I wanted to come and call on you just once before leaving.</q>
</p>
<p>
<span class="stage-direction">Beni.—</span>
        Ah, my friend Becharam, we are poor sort of folk here! We have
        to work for our living: we prefer to visit places where the secrets of
        knowledge or virtue are investigated. We have a good many rich relatives
        and acquaintances, but we feel embarrassed in their presence; we visit
        them very occasionally, when we have fallen into any trouble, or have
        any very particular business on hand. It is never a pleasure to call on
        upon them, and when we do go we derive no intellectual benefit from the
        visit; for whatever respect rich men may show to other rich men, they
        have not much to say to us; they just remark

        <q>It is very hot to-day.  How is your business getting on? Is it
        flourishing? Have a smoke?</q>

        If only they speak cheerfully and pleasantly to us, we are fully
        satisfied. Ah, learning and worth have nothing like the respect shown
        to them that is shown to wealth! Paying court to rich men is a very
        dangerous thing: there is a popular saying:—

        <q>The friendship of the rich is an embankment made of sand.</q>

        Their moods are capricious: a trifle will offend them just as a trifle
        will please them. People do not consider this: wealth has such magic
        in it that they will put up with any humiliation, any indignity from a
        rich man; they will even submit to a thrashing, and say to the rich man
        after it:—

        <q>It is your honour’s good pleasure.</q>

        However this be, it is a hard thing to live with the rich and not
        forfeit one’s chances of happiness in the next world. In that
        affair of to-day, for instance, we had a hard struggle for the right.
    </p>
<p>
<span class="stage-direction">Becharam.—</span>
        From observation of Baburam Babu’s general behaviour, I am
        inclined to think that his affairs are not prospering. Alas, alas, what
        counsellors he has got! That wretched Mahomedan, Thakchacha, a prince of
        rogues! there is an evil magic in him. Then Bancharam, the
        attorney’s clerk! he is like a fine mango, fair outside but rotten
        at the core.  Well-practised in all the arts of chicanery, like a cat
        treading stealthily along in the wet, he simulates innocence while all
        the while exercising his wiles to entrap his prey. Anybody falling under
        the influence of that sorcery would be utterly, and for ever, ruined.
        Then there is Bakreswar the schoolmaster, a teacher of ethics forsooth!
        A passed master indeed in the art of cajolery, a very prince of
        flatterers! Ugh! But tell me, is it your English education that has
        given you this high moral standard?
    </p>
<p>
<span class="stage-direction">Beni.—</span>
        Have I this high moral standard you attribute to me? It is only
        your kindness to say so. The slight acquaintance I have with morality is
        entirely due to the kind favour of Barada Babu, of Badaragan: I lived
        with him for some time, and he very kindly gave me some excellent
        advice.
    </p>
<p>
<span class="stage-direction">Becharam.—</span>
        Who is this Barada Babu? Please tell me some particulars
        about him. It is always a pleasure to me to hear anything of this kind.

    </p>
<p>
<span class="stage-direction">Beni.—</span>
        Barada Babu’s home is in Eastern Bengal, in Pergunnah Etai
        Kagamari. On the death of his father he moved to Calcutta, and found
        great difficulty at first in providing himself with food and clothing:
        he had not even the wherewithal to buy his daily meal. But from
        his boyhood he had always engaged in meditation upon divine things,
        and so it was that when trouble befell him it did not affect him so
        much. At this time he used to live in a common tiled hut, his only means
        of subsistence being the two rupees a month which he received from a
        younger brother of his father’s. He was on terms of intimacy with
        a few good men and would associate with none but these: he was very
        independent, and refused to be under obligations to anybody. Not having
        the means to keep either a man-servant or a maid-servant, he did all his
        own marketing, cooking for himself as well; and he did not neglect his
        studies even when he was cooking. Morning noon and night, he calmly
        and peacefully meditated on God. The clothes in which he attended school
        were torn and dirty, and excited the derision of rich men’s sons:
        he pretended not to hear them when they laughed and jeered at him, and
        eventually succeeded by his pleasant and courteous address in winning
        them completely over. With very many, pride is the only result of
        English learning: they scorn the very earth they live on. This however
        found no place in the mind of Barada Babu: his disposition was too calm
        and mild. When he had completed his education he left school, and at
        once obtained employment as a teacher, on thirty rupees a month. He then
        took his mother, his wife and his two nephews to live with him, and did
        his very utmost to make them comfortable. He would also look after the
        wants of the many poor people living in his immediate neighbourhood,
        helping them, as far as his means allowed, with money, visiting them
        when they were sick, and supplying them with medicine. As none of these
        poor people could afford to send their children to school, he held a
        class for them himself every morning. One of his cousins who had fallen
        dangerously ill after his father’s death, recovered entirely,
        thanks to the unremitting attention of Barada Babu, who sat by his
        bedside for days and nights together. He was deeply devoted to his aunt,
        and regarded her quite as a mother. Some men appear to have a contempt
        for the things of this world in comparison with things of eternity, like
        the contempt for death that is characteristic of those who are in
        constant attendance at
        burning-<i lang="bn">ghâts</i>.
        Does death or calamity befall any of their friends or kinsfolk, the
        world, they feel, is nothing, and God all. This idea is constantly
        present to the mind of Barada Babu: conversation with him and
        observation of his conduct soon make it apparent; but he never parades
        his opinions before the world. He is in no sense ostentatious: he
        never does anything for mere appearance sake. All his good deeds are
        done in secret: numbers of people meet with kindness from him, but only
        the person actually benefited by him is aware of it; and he is much
        annoyed if others get any inkling of it. Though a man of varied
        accomplishments, he is without a particle of vanity. It is the man who
        has only a smattering of learning who is puffed up with pride and
        self-importance.

        <q>Aha!</q> says such a one to himself, <q>what a very learned man I am!
        Who can write as I do? Who is so erudite as I? How I always do speak to
        the point!</q>

        Barada Babu is a different sort of man altogether: though his learning
        is so profound, he never treats the thoughts of others as beneath his
        attention. It does not annoy him to hear an opinion expressed opposite
        to his own: on the contrary, he listens with pleasure, and reviews
        his own beliefs. To describe in detail all his good qualities would be
        a long affair, but they may be summed up in the remark that so gentle
        and god-fearing a man has rarely been seen: he could not do wrong even
        if his life were at stake. Yes, the amount of instruction to be had
        from personal intercourse with Barada Babu far exceeds any to be got
        from books!
    </p>
<p>
<span class="stage-direction">Becharam.—</span>
        Ah, how it charms one to hear of a man like that! But now, as it is
        getting very late, and I have to cross the river, I will, with your
        permission, return home. Let me see you for a moment at the police
        court to-morrow.
    </p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/>
<p> <span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_49">[49]</a></span><br/> </p>
<p> </p> <p> </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
