<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a id="CHAPTER_XI"/>CHAPTER <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>.<br/>
			<small>THE POETASTER.</small></h2>
			<p>THE pandits of Agarpara were enjoying their usual evening lounge beneath their favourite tree: they were all either taking snuff or smoking, coughing and sneezing, chaffing each other and joking. One of them asked: <q>How is Vidyaratna? The good Brahman, in his zeal for gain, has lamed himself going to Manirampur in response to an invitation. I was concerned to see him leaping on a stick yesterday as he went to bathe.</q> Vidyabhushan replied: <q>Oh! Vidyaratna is all right again: the pain in his foot has been considerably alleviated, what with warm lime and turmeric, and dry fomentations. Come, gentlemen, listen to the poetry which our friend the great poet Kankan<a id="FNanchor_25_25"/><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_25_25">[25]</a> has composed with special reference to the Manirampur entertainment.</q></p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">Let the drum beat in triumph, uplift the glad song,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">For the guests are assembled, a glittering throng;<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">In the gay halls of Madhub, as radiantly bright,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">As the heaven of Indra, entrancing the sight.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">How dazzling the glow that illuminates all,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">How brilliant the flowers that engarland the wall!<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">See, apart sit the friends of the bridegroom and bride,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Retainers in scarlet on every side.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">What ravishing melody floats on the air<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">With perfume of blossoms surpassingly rare!<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Be sure, so celestial a scene to array<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">In Hymen’s sweet honour, took many a day.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">But the ground is just soaking here under the tent<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Where the rain is descending through many a rent.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And these up-country <i lang="bn">durwan</i>, offensively loud,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">What business have they to be hustling the crowd?<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Discordant the noises that deafen the ear,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And the shouts and the hubbub are awful to hear.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Yet in view of the sweets and the dainties in store,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">You’d put up with annoyances double or more.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">See those figures in paste on the walls stuck about!<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">How the pedigree-poets their rhapsodies shout!<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Now list to these verses, and publish the fame<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Of Kankan⁠—the paragon verse-maker’s name!<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">The bridegroom is coming! A silence profound<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Is felt for a moment, and plaudits resound.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">But the juvenile Babus are eager for fun,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And lo! in a minute the row has begun.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">His schemes are miscarrying, Thakchacha fears,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">As he listens aghast to the shouts and the jeers.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">We too are astounded;⁠—this banging and crashing!<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">This rending of carpets and clanging and clashing!<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Why, the glass chandeliers they are wantonly smashing!<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">We’d better be off, we are in for a thrashing!<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">In wonder sits Mati, revolving the thought,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>It seems my investiture’s profiting nought!</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0"><q>The scoundrel Bakreshwar!</q> uprises a shout,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>Give him a caning and hustle him out!</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">And Bancharam also, the schemer profound,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Is wriggling in torture and howls on the ground.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Says Becharam hastily, <q>Here, come aside;</q><br/></span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>Things do not look promising: where shall we hide?</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">And carries off Beni, bereft of resource.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">While ever the tumult increases in force.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0"><q>Help, help!</q> holloas Baburam, much in alarm,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">For support round a pillar entwining his arm.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Ho, speed to the rescue Thakchacha the brave!<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">But to keep a whole skin’s the one thought of the knave!<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Whom, with head muffled up as he gingerly goes,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">They arrest as chief culprit, and hurl on his nose,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And roll in the dust till his eyes are of sand full,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And tear out the hair of his head by the handful.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Hear <q><i lang="fa">Tauba!</i></q> and <q><i lang="fa">Tauba!</i></q> the Mussulman yell!<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>Of my sins I repent, on the border of hell!</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>But I’d nothing whatever to do with it, no!</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>An innocent Moslem⁠—why badger him so?</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>Bismillah! alack! To appear on the scene</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>Such an outrage to suffer, was folly I ween!</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>Among the mild Hindus I guilelessly came</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>From the parent of motives; and this is their game!</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>Ah fool! the advice of thy friends to despise,</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>At the cost of thy beauty, thy beard, and thine eyes!</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">Now enter the <i lang="bn">durwans</i> athirst for the fray,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And round them their <i lang="bn">lathis</i> impartially lay;<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Then howls of excitement and terror and pain,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">The crack of the truncheon and swish of the cane!<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">The friends of the bridegroom and those of the bride<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Are scuttling in terror on every side:<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Within flies the bridegroom, the company’s scattered,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And all the gay trappings of Hymen are shattered.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0"><q>Thakchacha still here!</q> some enthusiast shouts,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>Pour mud on his turban and tear off his clouts!</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">In dishonour poor Baburam slinks from the hall<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And all his brave show goes for nothing at all.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">His costume’s in tatters within and without,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And shawlless and shoeless he stumbles about,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Distractedly moaning:⁠—<q>How hard is my case</q><br/></span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>Whom death from exposure now stares in the face!</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>The oncoming tempest I hear from afar:</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>’Tis the progress triumphal of Death on his car!</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>Thus helpless and sole, not a creature to aid,</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>Can his dire visitation be longer delayed?</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>I am bruised and exhausted, and breath I have none:</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>The Fates are against me! O what have I done?</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>And my pitiful lot, if it reaches the ear</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>Of the wife of my bosom, will kill her, I fear.</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>Did the marriage come off I’m unable to tell!</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>From a blow on the cranium unconscious I fell.</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>These schemes matrimonial dictated by vanity</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>Have landed me here on the verge of insanity!</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">Thus loudly bewailing, a cottage he spies.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Where no cruel warder an access denies.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And there in a corner, alone, on a mat,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Monumental in misery⁠—Thakchacha sat!<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>Ah traitor and craven, ’twas cruelly done,</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>Thy comrade deserting, thou treacherous one!</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>O frailty of mortals! how falleth the best,</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>When the touchstone of peril puts love to the test!’</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0"><q>Hush, check your emotion!</q> his champion replies,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>For where are we safe from our enemies spies?</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0">
						<q>You’ll own, when you’ve heard me⁠—my confident trust is⁠—</q>
						<br/>
					</span>
					<span class="i0"><q>You’ve done your protector a grievous injustice</q>!<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">’Tis daybreak, as homeward they ruefully wend,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And Kankan his epic thus brings to an end.<br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>On hearing this lampoon upon Baburam Babu, Tarkavagish was furious, and exclaimed: <q>Ha, ha! this is poetry indeed! Saraswati in the flesh! Kalidas come to life again! What profound learning too has the great poet Kankan displayed! So precocious a boy cannot possibly live long. The metre too⁠—astounding⁠—never heard anything like it⁠—it runs like a nursery rhyme! Now a man who is a Brahman and a pandit to boot will always speak good of a rich man: there is nothing gentlemanly in mere abuse.</q> With these words, he got up in a rage, and would have left the place, but the assembled pandits expressed their full approval of his words, and urging him to stop and be calm, got him at last by sheer force to sit down again. Another pandit then skilfully introduced other topics, and ignoring what had passed began to sing the praises of Baburam Babu and Madhab Babu. A Brahman, being generally rather dense, cannot easily see when a joke is intended: through constant study of the <i lang="bn">Shástras</i>, his mind moves solely in the region of the <i lang="bn">Shástras</i> and has no practice in worldly matters. Tarkavagish however was soon mollified and amused himself with the subject in hand.</p>
			<hr style="width: 65%;"/>
			<p>
				<span class="pagenum">
					<a id="Page_85">[85]</a>
				</span>
				<br/>
			</p>
			<p> </p>
			<p> </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
