<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
    <section id="endnotes" role="doc-endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
        <h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_1_1"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_1" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[1]</span></a>
<p>
<i lang="bn">Kulins.</i>— Mr. Phillips, in a note to his excellent
    translation of <q>Kopal Kundala,</q> says:—
</p>
<p>
<q>Large sums are paid by fathers of girls for Kulin bridegrooms. A Kulin
    Brahmin girl, to preserve her caste and social position intact, must be
    married to a Kulin bridegroom. So it happens that Kulin youths are sometimes
    married to ten or twenty different wives. They can visit the houses of their
    numerous fathers-in-law, and are not only well entertained when there, but
    expect a present on coming away. There have been cases in which poor fathers
    of Kulin girls have taken them and had them wedded to old men on the point
    of death. They cannot afford to pay for a young and suitable bridegroom, and
    it is an indelible disgrace for their daughters to remain unmarried. On the
    other hand, Brahmins of lower family have to pay for a bride. The state of
    things is not so bad as it used to be. The feeling of the upper classes of
    Hindoos is strongly in favour of monogamy, and a Kulin who marries many
    wives is regarded with some contempt and aversion.</q>
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_2_2"/><a href="#FNanchor_2_2" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[2]</span></a>
<p>
<i>Literally</i>—
    <q>He has drank down Mother Saraswati at one gulp.</q>
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_3_3"/><a href="#FNanchor_3_3" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[3]</span></a>
<p>
<q>When a Hindu boy is first initiated into school life, he is presented
    with a piece of chalk, a
    <i lang="bn">tal</i> leaf and a plantain leaf
    </q>—Bose—<q>The Hindoos as they Are.</q>
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_4_4"/><a href="#FNanchor_4_4" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[4]</span></a>
<p>
    The bracelet on the right hand is one of the signs that a woman is married,
    and that her husband is still living; another sign is a mark on the forehead
    called the ‘sindhoor.’
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_5_5"/><a href="#FNanchor_5_5" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[5]</span></a>
<p>
<i lang="bn">Sakhishamvad</i>—
    <q>Songs expressive of news conveyed to Krishna by Brinda, one of the Gopis,
    of the pangs of separation felt by the milkmaids of
    Brindabun</q>—Bose—<q>The Hindoos as they Are.</q>
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_6_6"/><a href="#FNanchor_6_6" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[6]</span></a>
<p>
<i lang="bn">The Shalgram</i>.—
    A flinty stone with the impression of an ammonite, which Hindoos think
    represents Vishnu: it is worshipped as Vishnu. Some Hindoos make large
    collections: one man was reputed to possess a collection of nearly eighty
    thousand.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_7_7"/><a href="#FNanchor_7_7" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[7]</span></a>
<p>
<i>Literally</i>—
    <q>Has cut a fine canal, and brought all the waters upon us.</q>
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_8_8"/><a href="#FNanchor_8_8" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[8]</span></a>
<p>
    The cat watching for a mouse, the heron and paddy birds for fish, are all
    alike regarded as types of hypocritical saintliness, and as such are largely
    used as figures in Sanscrit and Bengali literature.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_9_9"/><a href="#FNanchor_9_9" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[9]</span></a>
<p>
<q>Field of <i lang="bn">beguns</i></q> is a popular expression for a source
    of continual profit, as <q>a field of roots</q> is used for a temporary
    source of profit.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_10_10"/><a href="#FNanchor_10_10" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[10]</span></a>
<p>
<i>Literally</i>—
    <q>He had a big heavy hand:</q>
    the opposite phrase used of a generous man is—
    <q>His hand is always turned palm upward.</q>
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_11_11"/><a href="#FNanchor_11_11" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[11]</span></a>
<p>
    The veneration with which Hindoos regard Benares is expressed in the
    Sanscrit <i lang="bn">slokas</i>:—

    <q>The heaps of your sins will all be burnt to ashes if you only name the
    name of Kashi.</q>

    All orthodox Hindus in their inmost hearts, look forward to spending the
    evening of their days, if possible, in <q>the Holy City,</q> where, after
    having passed the two periods of their lives in the world as students and
    householders, they may pass the last as ascetics, in reading and meditation.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_12_12"/><a href="#FNanchor_12_12" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[12]</span></a>
<p>
    Gambling has always been popular in the East, and was evidently so amongst
    the ancient Aryans. In a translation of Kaegi’s Rigveda, by
    Arrowsmith, there is a song called <q>The Song of the Gambler.</q>
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_13_13"/><a href="#FNanchor_13_13" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[13]</span></a>
<p>
    The favourite expression of Bancharam, which occurs often in this book,
    means literally:

    <q>Is this a cake in the hands of a small child?</q>

    The idea being that a cake is easily snatched out of the hand of a child.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_14_14"/><a href="#FNanchor_14_14" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[14]</span></a>
<p>
<i>Literally</i>—
    <q>Many undertakings getting as far as the ‘h’ turn back when
    just short of the ‘Ksha’.</q>

    In some old grammars ‘Ksha’, instead of being the first of the
    compound consonants, as now, was put as the last of the simple consonants.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_15_15"/><a href="#FNanchor_15_15" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[15]</span></a>
<p>
    An old Aryan proverb corresponding to this is:
    <q>Even an ugly man may be found beautiful, when he is rich.</q>
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_16_16"/><a href="#FNanchor_16_16" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[16]</span></a>
<p>
    The following vivid description of a nor’wester, as the storms so
    common in Bengal in the hot season are called, occurs in Mr. Vaughan’s
    <q>The Trident, The Crescent, and The Cross</q>:
</p>
<p> <q>For days, it may be for weeks, the sky has been burdened with clouds
    charged with the needful watery stores. Millions of longing eyes have
    watched their shifting course and changing forms. Ever and anon it has
    seemed as if their refreshing streams were about to descend, but, as if
    pent up, and restrained by an invisible hand, the clouds have refused
    to pour down the desired blessing: at length one point of the sky
    gathers darkness: a deep inky hue spreads over one-half the heavens:
    the wild birds begin to shriek and betake themselves to shelter: for a
    few moments an ominous death-like calm seems to reign: Nature appears
    to be listening in awful expectancy of the coming outburst: in another
    instant a dazzling flash of lightning is seen, followed by terrific
    rolls of thunder: a hurricane sweeps across the plains: sometimes
    uprooting massive trees in its course, and darkening the air with clouds
    of sand and dust: a deadly conflict seems to rage amongst the elements:
    the lightning is more brilliant: the crashes of the thunder more
    awful: yet the rain does not come. But the strife does not last long.
    Now isolated big drops begin to fall: then torrents of water pour down
    from the bursting clouds: driven along the wings of the storm, the rain
    sometimes appears like drifting cataracts, or oblique sheets of water.
    Speedily parched fields are inundated, and empty rivers swollen.
    All this takes place in less than an hour: then the storm abates,
    the darkness passes away, the sun once more shines forth: the
    atmosphere is cooled and purified, thirsty Nature is satisfied, and all
    creation seems to rejoice.</q>
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_17_17"/><a href="#FNanchor_17_17" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[17]</span></a>
<p>
    Before court-fee stamps came into use, attorneys were personally liable for
    fees payable to the court, and in default of payment they were punished with
    suspension.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_18_18"/><a href="#FNanchor_18_18" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[18]</span></a>
<p>
    The name given to a continuous supply of <i lang="bn">Ghee</i> dropping
    through seven courses at certain of the Hindoo ceremonies, such as a
    child’s first eating rice, at investiture with the sacred thread, and
    at marriage.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_19_19"/><a href="#FNanchor_19_19" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[19]</span></a>
<p>
    On one night in the month of <i lang="bn">Phalgun</i> a lamp is kept burning
    in all Hindoo households, and if it is extinguished misfortunes are expected
    to happen.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_20_20"/><a href="#FNanchor_20_20" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[20]</span></a>
<p>
    The fear that a Hindoo feels lest he shall have no one to offer the
    customary libations to his manes and those of his ancestors is expressed in
    <q><i lang="bn">Sakuntala.</i></q> King Dushyanta says:—
</p>
<div class="poem">
<div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><q>No son remains in King Dushyanta’s place</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>To offer sacred homage to the dead</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>Of Purus’ noble line: my ancestors</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>Must drink these glistening tears the last
                libation</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>A childless man can ever hope to make
                them.</q><br/></span>
</div>
</div>
<p style="text-align:right;">Sir M. Monier-William’s Translation.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_21_21"/><a href="#FNanchor_21_21" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[21]</span></a>
<p>
    A local name for Durga: most towns in Bengal have some local deity
    representing Durga: at Krishnaghar the local deity is Ananda Maye.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_22_22"/><a href="#FNanchor_22_22" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[22]</span></a>
<p>
<i>Literally</i>—
    <q>Were performing the <i lang="bn">shraddha</i> of Vedavyasa,</q>
    the reputed author of the <i lang="bn">Mahabharata</i>.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_23_23"/><a href="#FNanchor_23_23" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[23]</span></a>
<p>
    It was no uncommon thing formerly at great men’s houses for uninvited
    guests to attend in some numbers, solely for the purpose of creating a
    disturbance.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_24_24"/><a href="#FNanchor_24_24" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[24]</span></a>
<p>
    One of the preliminary ceremonies of a Hindoo marriage, is for the
    bridegroom elect to put a thread on his right hand, on the day preceding the
    night of the marriage (a Hindoo marriage cannot take place before the
    evening twilight).
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_25_25"/><a href="#FNanchor_25_25" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[25]</span></a>
<p>
    Kankan was the name of a Bengali poet: this name is assumed for the nonce
    by the poetaster.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_26_26"/><a href="#FNanchor_26_26" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[26]</span></a>
<p>
    Prahlad is ever a favourite with Hindoos: his story is told in the Vishnu
    Purana: there is a capital ballad on him in Miss Toru Dutt’s
    ‘Ballads of Hindustan.’
    The story of Prahlad has been supposed to point to the gradual absorption
    into the Hindu system of the aboriginal tribes. The resistance long offered
    to that absorption, is supposed to be hinted at in the treatment of Prahlad
    by his Daitya parents.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_27_27"/><a href="#FNanchor_27_27" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[27]</span></a>
<p>
    Repetitions of the name of Hari, or Vishnu, made with the beads of the Tulsi
    plant: the rosaries are of different lengths: the common one consists of
    108 beads: a pandit once told me he had seen one of 100,000 beads.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_28_28"/><a href="#FNanchor_28_28" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[28]</span></a>
<p>
<i>Literally</i>—

    <q>They see all round them only the yellow flower of the mustard plant</q>
    — a man at the point of death being supposed to see everything with a
    yellow tinge upon it.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_29_29"/><a href="#FNanchor_29_29" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[29]</span></a>
<p>
<i>Literally</i>—
    <q>To lose his drinking pot, and all for a cowrie</q>—
    the pot being either of block-tin, or of silver for holding drinking water,
    and carried by every Mussulman, and largely by Hindoos when moving about.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_30_30"/><a class="pgkilled"><span class="label">[30]</span></a>
<p>
    The <i lang="bn">Kabiraj</i>.
    means that the sick man should be taken to the banks of the Ganges, that he
    might die happily with his feet in the water. People are often taken to the
    river bank when very ill, and left in a small hut, which will be erected for
    them there, where, if they are rich enough to afford it, a Pandit is engaged
    to watch the pulse; and when the pulse becomes so feeble as to show death to
    be at hand, the Brahmin in attendance takes the sick person to the river and
    places the feet in the water: the sick person will then die happy in the
    full assurance of salvation. Death is often actually hastened by the zeal
    with which the relatives of sick persons hurry them to the river-side, or,
    if they are too far from a river, outside the house, for it is regarded as
    an happy augury if the sick man dies being able to think of the sacred
    waters or even speak of them with his latest breath. Indeed the phrase;
    <q>He died conscious</q>
    is practically equivalent to,
    <q>He died happy, in the full assurance of salvation.</q>

    Benares is regarded as so holy a place to die in that consciousness at death
    is not regarded as a
    <i lang="la">sine qua non</i>
    of a happy death: the mere fact of dying in Benares is of itself sufficient
    to ensure the feeling of happiness and assurance.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_31_31"/><a href="#FNanchor_31_31" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[31]</span></a>
<p>
    An evil spirit is supposed to depart in a
    <i lang="bn">sirish</i>
    seed thrown over the shoulder.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_32_32"/><a href="#FNanchor_32_32" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[32]</span></a>
<p>
<q>He is utterly unscrupulous</q>, literally:—
    <q>His orthodoxy is killing cows and making presents of shoes.</q>
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_33_33"/><a href="#FNanchor_33_33" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[33]</span></a>
<p>
    The wooden frame is here referred to in which the heads of goats are put to
    be cut off with one stroke of the broad sacrificial knife, with the eye of
    Kali on it, used for the purpose; the literal word is <q>The Bone Cutter.</q>
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_34_34"/><a href="#FNanchor_34_34" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[34]</span></a>
<p>
<i lang="bn">Stri-Achar</i>.—
    The name given to certain ceremonies which are gone through amongst the
    women of a household where a marriage is being celebrated, the object being
    to promote conjugal felicity: one of the ceremonies consists in the ladies
    of the family taking
    <i lang="bn">pán</i> and betel
    in their hands and offering up prayers for the welfare of the bridegroom.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_35_35"/><a href="#FNanchor_35_35" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[35]</span></a>
<p>
    Ram Prasad was a popular poet who flourished at the same time as Bharat
    Chandra Raya, who was one of Maharajah Kishen Chandra’s
    ‘Five Jewels.’
    Maharajah Kishen Chandra was Maharajah of Nuddea at the time of Lord Clive:
    he was a Sanscrit scholar, and a great patron of learning.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_36_36"/><a href="#FNanchor_36_36" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[36]</span></a>
<p>
<i>Literally</i>—
    <q>Before he had got as far as the initial mystic salutation to Ganesh, the
    sacred Om.</q>

    All business is commenced with this mystic invocation: it is written at the
    top of letters in the form of a crescent with a dot in the centre.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_37_37"/><a href="#FNanchor_37_37" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[37]</span></a>
<p>
    These questions were simply put to see if the patient was still
    conscious— see note 30.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_38_38"/><a href="#FNanchor_38_38" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[38]</span></a>
<p>
    To die conscious in the full possession of all his faculties is regarded as
    of supreme importance with a Hindoo, and as ensuring a happy hereafter; even
    though a Hindoo may not be dying in the waters of the sacred Ganges, if he
    is able to ask the question as he dies—

    <q>Is this the Ganges that I am dying in?</q>
    ’tis enough: the priest in attendance will reply:
    <q>It is the Ganges.</q>
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_39_39"/><a href="#FNanchor_39_39" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[39]</span></a>
<p>
    A place supposed to be famous for witchcraft. Some say it is an old name for
    Assam.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_40_40"/><a href="#FNanchor_40_40" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[40]</span></a>
<p>
    One of the features of a
    <i lang="bn">shraddha</i>.
    ceremony is the assembly of Pandits, who engage in a dispute more or less
    factitious, in the course of which a point arises when they all get so
    excited that they almost come to actual fisticuffs; an arbitrator then steps
    forward, and the excitement subsides as suddenly as it had arisen.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_41_41"/><a href="#FNanchor_41_41" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[41]</span></a>
<p>
    The point in the supposed argument is to create amusement amongst the
    by-standers by the difference in pronunciation of certain words by Pandits
    from different districts. The whole sentence is a jumble of more or less
    nonsense, designed to give the speakers credit with the audience for great
    learning. The ordinary arguments for discussion amongst Pandits who are
    adepts in the Nyaya Philosophy as taught in the Nuddea school are on the
    difference between objects perceived by the Senses and those perceived by
    the Intellect: it is Gnan <i>versus</i> Vidya. The discussion here is a
    humorous travesty.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_42_42"/><a href="#FNanchor_42_42" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[42]</span></a>
<p>
    Tales from the
    <i lang="bn">Mahabharata</i> and the
    <i lang="bn">Ramayana</i>
    form almost the entire mental food of Bengal children.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_43_43"/><a href="#FNanchor_43_43" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[43]</span></a>
<p>
    Jagat Sett was the famous banker of the Nawab Nazims of Bengal.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_44_44"/><a href="#FNanchor_44_44" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[44]</span></a>
<p>
    The reference is to a story how each drop of blood as it fell from the
    Demon <i lang="bn">Raktabij</i>
    produced a new demon, and how Debi and her companions put their tongues out
    and licked up the blood.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_45_45"/><a href="#FNanchor_45_45" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[45]</span></a>
<p>
    The reference is to an old story about a joint-family: there were four
    sons-in-law in the family of whom Dhananjayas was one. Efforts were
    constantly made to annoy them to get them to leave, and three went because
    their feelings were offended. Dhananjayas would not go until he was actually
    beaten.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_46_46"/><a href="#FNanchor_46_46" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[46]</span></a>
<p>
    It is a very common practice in India to give earnest-money in advance,
    when making any arrangement with a small tradesman; it is commonly asked
    for with the excuse of buying materials, but the idea really is that of
    binding or closing a bargain.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_47_47"/><a href="#FNanchor_47_47" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[47]</span></a>
<p>
    This proverb practically means that gentlemen are doing menial acts,
    while beggars are riding on horseback.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_48_48"/><a href="#FNanchor_48_48" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[48]</span></a>
<p>
<q>Seven</q> seems a favourite number when reference is made to wealth.
    <q>The Wealth of Seven Kings</q> is a favourite expression in Bengali Fairy
    Tales.
</p>
<p>
<q>Ten</q> in Bengali seems to be used for the whole world, as <q>Five</q>
    in Sanskrit.
</p>
<p>
<q><i lang="bn">Dash Jan</i></q>— <q>Ten people</q> in
    Bengali means everybody.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_49_49"/><a href="#FNanchor_49_49" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[49]</span></a>
<p>
    It is regarded as of evil omen to call a man back when he has just started
    anywhere.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_50_50"/><a href="#FNanchor_50_50" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[50]</span></a>
<p>
    The indigenous village schools used to be noted for the severity of
    discipline in vogue there: various stories are told of the ingenuity of the
    village school-masters in devising ever-fresh punishment. One punishment
    was adopted from the illustrations of Bala Krishna, who is generally
    represented as kneeling on one knee holding something in his right hand, and
    something on his head; the poor boy who was to be punished was made to kneel
    on one knee, and hold a brick in his upturned hand.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_51_51"/><a href="#FNanchor_51_51" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[51]</span></a>
<p>
<i>Literally</i>—

    <q>Day and night there were cries of ‘Let us eat,’ ‘Let us
    eat’— To-day we will eat the elephants out of the elephant
    stables, and to-morrow the horses out of their stalls.</q>
</p>
<p>
    The reference is to the popular stories current in Bengal about the
    <i lang="bn">Rakshashas</i> and <i lang="bn">Rakshashis</i>,
    the ogres and ogresses of our English childhood.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_52_52"/><a href="#FNanchor_52_52" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[52]</span></a>
<p>
<i>Literally</i>— <q>Day and night are still with us.</q>—
    The idea seems to be that the Universe is still in its place, and that there
    is still justice in the earth; the popular tradition apparently being that
    justice is gradually disappearing from the earth.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_53_53"/><a href="#FNanchor_53_53" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[53]</span></a>
<p>
    The reference is to a rich merchant, who, having on one of his journeys seen
    Durga sitting in the form of a woman on a lotus, in the sea off Ceylon, was
    punished with solitary confinement for some time; he was at length released
    through his son’s efforts and returned home with all his wealth.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_54_54"/><a href="#FNanchor_54_54" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[54]</span></a>
<p>
<i>Literally</i>— <q>Their luck is a covering of leaves,</q>—
    the idea being that as leaves are easily blown about, so any slight
    circumstances may cause an Englishman’s luck to turn: he may be in
    bad luck at one moment, but he will be in good luck the next moment.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_55_55"/><a href="#FNanchor_55_55" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[55]</span></a>
<p>
    There is a reference here to a popular belief that Ravan’s funeral pile is
    ever blazing and in Bengal people closing their ears can imagine that they
    hear the sound of the blazing and crackling, just as children in England
    imagine they can hear the sound of the ocean waves that encircle the island,
    when they apply a shell to the ear.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_56_56"/><a href="#FNanchor_56_56" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[56]</span></a>
<p>
<q>Don’t talk to me of Khod-kast and Pai-kast: I will make them all
    Ek-kast.</q>
</p>
<p>
    The remark shows utter ignorance on the part of Matilall of terms used in
    connection with landed property in Bengal. Khod-kast is a cultivator who
    cultivates his own land: Pai-kast is one who cultivates land for another:
    Ek-kast is simply a term invented by Matilall, and would mean one who
    cultivates for one.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_57_57"/><a href="#FNanchor_57_57" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[57]</span></a>
<p>
    These are all signs of poverty in the East: oil has always been regarded in
    the East as a sign of prosperity, and we find it constantly referred to in
    the Hebrew Bible—
    <q>It is like the precious ointment upon the head.</q>
</p>
<p>
    The absence of oil on the head is a distinct mark of poverty in the East.
    A thin stomach would also be regarded as a sign of poverty in a country like
    Bengal, especially where <q>The fair round belly</q> of Shakespeare, and
    <q>The front like the front of Ganesh</q> of the Bengali, is regarded as a
    mark of prosperity. A good story is told of an Indian client who had full
    confidence in the English barrister to whom he had entrusted his case
    because he was a very fat individual.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_58_58"/><a href="#FNanchor_58_58" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[58]</span></a>
<p>
    There is a reference here to a story, found in the Puranas, a familiar
    child’s tale in Bengal, of a sage who was disturbed in his quiet meditation
    by seeing a cat pursuing a mouse: he turned the mouse into a tiger that it
    might escape from the cat, but he very speedily had to turn the tiger back
    into a mouse again, as the beast was about to attack and kill him.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_59_59"/><a href="#FNanchor_59_59" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[59]</span></a>
<p>
    Many are the stories told of the wariness of the Indian crow.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_60_60"/><a href="#FNanchor_60_60" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[60]</span></a>
<p>
    There is a beautiful figure taken from a large tree in
    <q><i lang="bn">Sakuntala;</i></q>
    in reference to a king’s responsibilities, it is said:—

</p>
<div class="poem">
<div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><q>Honour to him who labours day by day</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>For the world’s weal, forgetful of his
                own,</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>Like some tall tree that with its stately
                head</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>Endures the solar beam, while underneath</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>It yields refreshing shelter to the
                weary.</q><br/></span>
</div>
</div>
<p style="text-align:right;">Sir M. Monier-William’s Translation.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_61_61"/><a href="#FNanchor_61_61" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[61]</span></a>
<p>
    The Harinbati was at one time the place where prisoners used to pound
    <i lang="bn">soorkey</i>,
    and the phrase
    <q>Go to the Harinbati</q> is still used in Bengal as equivalent to
    <q>Go to jail.</q>
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_62_62"/><a href="#FNanchor_62_62" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[62]</span></a>
<p>
    It is a common tradition that if this expression is whispered in the ear of
    any one snoring three times, the snoring will cease.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_63_63"/><a href="#FNanchor_63_63" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[63]</span></a>
<p>
    The reference is to the stories told of a brother of Ravan who was famous as
    a great sleeper: he is said to have slept the whole year, except on one
    day, when he would wake, and eat a hearty meal of some thousand animals:
    his name is taken from the tradition that his ears were as large as water
    jars.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_64_64"/><a href="#FNanchor_64_64" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[64]</span></a>
<p>
    The first salutation of a Brahman is in the form of a blessing: his hands
    are held out before him, palms upward: his second salutation is the
    ordinary one with hands folded together against his forehead, the fingers
    upwards: this is after his first salutation has been acknowledged.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_65_65"/><a href="#FNanchor_65_65" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[65]</span></a>
<p>
    The story of these two is found in the Bhagavadgita, which, with the Chandi
    or Hymn to Durga, forms the favourite reading of the class of Pundits. Many
    Brahmins make a living as itinerary readers of the Bhagavadgita, or
    <i lang="bn">Ramayana</i>:
    they halt for weeks at a time at various places, and erect a temporary
    booth, where they read and explain to all who may come to hear them: at the
    end of a course of reading they are presented with presents: one man in
    Patna is reputed to make as much as five hundred rupees for one course of
    reading the
    <i lang="bn">Ramayana</i>
    which may take him about six weeks.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_66_66"/><a href="#FNanchor_66_66" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[66]</span></a>
<p>
    One of the verses I have referred to in note 12.
    <q>The Song of the Gambler,</q> runs:—
</p>
<div class="poem">
<div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><q>The gambler hurries to the gaming table,</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>To-day I’ll win, he thinks in his
                excitement,</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>The dice inflame his greed, his hopes mount
                higher,</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>He leaves his winnings all with his
                opponent.</q><br/></span>
</div>
</div></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_67_67"/><a href="#FNanchor_67_67" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[67]</span></a>
<p>
    The reference seems to be to the last of the divisions of the
    <i lang="bn">Mahabharata</i>: the divisions are called
    <i lang="bn">Parba</i>.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_68_68"/><a href="#FNanchor_68_68" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[68]</span></a>
<p>
<i>Literally</i>—<q>He is sharp enough in the
    <i lang="bn">buri</i>, but blind in the
    <i lang="bn">kahan</i>,</q>—
    a <i lang="bn">buri</i>
    is equal to 20 cowries:
    a <i lang="bn">kahan</i> to 1,600 cowries.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_69_69"/><a href="#FNanchor_69_69" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[69]</span></a>
<p>
    It is a popular tradition that Valmiki, the author of the
    <i lang="bn">Ramayana</i>,
    wrote his famous epic before Ram was born: thus the expression practically
    means: <q>It was a foregone conclusion.</q>
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_70_70"/><a href="#FNanchor_70_70" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[70]</span></a>
<p>
    There is a popular tradition about a small bird, called in Bengal the
    Chátak, which sings in the hot weather months: the tradition is that
    it drinks only rain-water, and that its song is a cry to Heaven for rain:
    this is only one of the many traditions pointing to the eagerness with
    which in India the annual rains are expected. The bird is a small
    black-plumaged bird, and its cry exactly resembles <q>Phatik Jal,</q> which
    the people interpret as <q>Sphatik Jal,</q>: <q>Water clear as crystal.</q>
    It is supposed to drink with its beak raised in the air; a synonym for an
    anxious man is— <q>He is like a Chátak.</q>
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_71_71"/><a href="#FNanchor_71_71" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[71]</span></a>
<p>
    Kankan, the name of the poet, the author of the Bengali Version of the
    Chandi, or Hymn to Durga: in the poetical effusion in the Tale the
    poetaster assumes the name of Kankan. Valmiki, the reputed author of the
    <i lang="bn">Ramayana</i>.
    Vyasa, the reputed author of the
    <i lang="bn">Mahabharat</i>.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_72_72"/><a href="#FNanchor_72_72" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[72]</span></a>
<p>
    A reference to the popular tradition how Hanuman won from Ravan’s
    wife the arrow presented by Brahma to Ravan, and how Hanuman presented it to
    Ram for Ravan’s destruction.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_73_73"/><a href="#FNanchor_73_73" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[73]</span></a>
<p>
    The wearing of charms is very common amongst all classes in Bengal: it is
    still a matter of popular belief that sickness may be cured, and harm
    averted, by their use. The actual charm is often a piece of bark on which a
    sacred text is written: this is folded in paper into a very small compass
    and is worn on a delicate silk string round the neck, or round the arm.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_74_74"/><a href="#FNanchor_74_74" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[74]</span></a>
<p>
    The author had doubtless read the lines in ‘Hamlet’:—
</p></div>
<div class="poem">
<div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><q>Let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp,</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>And crook the pregnant hinges of the
                knee,</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>Where thrift may follow fawning.</q><br/></span>
</div>
</div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_75_75"/><a href="#FNanchor_75_75" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[75]</span></a>
<p>
    In Hindu Philosophy, the name given to the third and lowest of the inherent
    natural qualities of man,— is
    <i lang="bn">Tamas</i>— Gloom or Darkness.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_76_76"/><a href="#FNanchor_76_76" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[76]</span></a>
<p>
    The most profound salutation that a Hindu can make, and one that denotes
    absolute devotion of a man’s whole body to the service of another, is one
    <q>with the eight members</q>: the members on which Hindus make religious
    marks,— the two hands, the chest, the forehead, the two eyes, the
    throat, and the middle of the back.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_77_77"/><a href="#FNanchor_77_77" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[77]</span></a>
<p>
    Women keep their money tied up in a corner of their
    <i lang="bn">saris</i>:
    the expression here means literally <q>the riches of your skirt</q>;
    men keep their money in a small bag stitched into their waist cloths.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_78_78"/><a href="#FNanchor_78_78" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[78]</span></a>
<p>
    No orthodox Hindu will commence any undertaking of importance, and some
    will not undertake even a short journey, without having first ascertained
    whether the day will be an auspicious one or not. The family Guru will be
    consulted; and even when an auspicious day has been fixed, the ladies of
    the <i lang="bn">zenana</i>
    will always insist upon the observance of certain ceremonies. A gentleman
    of position, when inviting a guest to visit him, will often send him by
    special messenger a slip of paper with the auspicious days for his journey
    written down by his Guru either in Sanskrit, or in the current language of
    the district.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_79_79"/><a href="#FNanchor_79_79" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[79]</span></a>
<p>
    Shuka was the author of the Commentary on the Vedas, and has sometimes been
    identified as Vishnu himself: he is said to have been the only one amongst
    many hundred millions of Hindoos who ever obtained perfect Nirvana: that
    is complete absorption into the Deity: the full expression is
    <q>Nirvana Mukti,</q> that is, Redemption, a salvation which consists in
    perfect absorption into the Deity.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_80_80"/><a href="#FNanchor_80_80" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[80]</span></a>
<p>
    There are several plays upon words in this concluding passage of the book:
    in this particular passage the word
    ‘Pani’
    is used both for ’Hand‘
    and for ‘Wife’:
    it came to be used in the latter secondary sense because one of the
    ceremonies, rendering a Hindu marriage legitimate, is the ceremony in which
    the bridegroom takes the bride by the hand. The use of words and phrases
    capable of a double meaning, is very common in Sanskrit writings.
</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><a id="Footnote_81_81"/><a href="#FNanchor_81_81" class="pginternal"><span class="label">[81]</span></a>
<p>
    According to a not uncommon custom of ending stories in Bengal, the author
    ends his story with the first lines of a song, which in full is:—
</p>
<div class="poem">
<div class="stanza">
<span class="i0"><q>Thus my story endeth,</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>The Natiya thorn withereth:</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>Why, oh Natiya thorn, dost wither?</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>Why does thy cow on me browse?</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>Why, O cow, dost thou browse?</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>Why does thy neat herd not tend me?</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>Why, O neat herd does not tend the cow?</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>Why does thy daughter-in-law not give me rice?</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>Why, O daughter-in-law, dost not give rice?</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>Why does my child cry?</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>Why, O child, dost thou cry?</q><br/></span>
<span class="i0"><q>Why, O ant, dost thou bite?</q><br/></span>
<span class="i2"><q>Koot, koot, koot.</q><br/></span>
</div>
</div> </div>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_223">[223]</a></span></p>
<p> </p> <p> </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
