<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Glossary</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="glossary" epub:type="glossary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Glossary</h2>
			<div class="center">
				<table data-summary="Glossary">
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Amlah</i>.</td>
							<td>A name for the whole establishment of an office; sometimes simply for a clerk.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Arjuna</i>.</td>
							<td>His story is told in the Bhagavad Gita.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Ashar</i>.</td>
							<td>The month corresponding to the English June-July:— The first month of the rainy season.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Astrologer</i>.</td>
							<td>An important person in Hindu households, where his chief duty is to cast horoscopes on the birth of children.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td> </td>
							<td> </td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Bael</i>.</td>
							<td>A Egle Marmelos. The fruit of this tree has a very hard rind, almost as hard as the cocoanut.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Bhagirathi</i>.</td>
							<td>A name given to that branch of the Ganges which lower down becomes the Hooghly. Sometimes used for the Ganges proper.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Baya</i>.</td>
							<td>A drum played with the left hand only.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Begun</i>.</td>
							<td>Brinjal/Egg-plant.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Bhima</i>.</td>
							<td>A great warrior of the Lunar Race, whose story is told in the Sanscrit Epic— <i lang="bn">Mahabharata</i>.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Bidri</i>.</td>
							<td>The name given to finely-chased metal ware, which was originally made at Bidri in the Deccan.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Budgerow</i>.</td>
							<td>The name given to a large house-boat used on the rivers of Bengal.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td> </td>
							<td> </td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Champac</i>.</td>
							<td>Michelia Champaka. A flowering tree that flowers in the rains: it bears large and yellow fragrant flowers, and is a very popular tree..</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Chowkidar</i>.</td>
							<td>A kind of rural policeman.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td> </td>
							<td> </td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Dampati Baran</i>.</td>
							<td>A form of Shraddha.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Dan Sagar</i>.</td>
							<td>Literally <q>Ocean of Gifts.</q> A form of funeral ceremony where every guest receives some present.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Darogah</i>.</td>
							<td>An Inspector of Police.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Dewan</i>.</td>
							<td>A government official, minister, or ruler.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Druva</i>.</td>
							<td>A boy of four years old, who went in search of Vishnu and received a sacred mantra of twelve letters from Narad. Upon the repetition of this mystic mantra Vishnu appeared to the boy.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Durga Poojah</i>.</td>
							<td>The great Autumn festival in honour of the goddess Durga, wife of Siva, during which all business is suspended in Bengal for ten days: it affords an opportunity for a re-union of families.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Durwan</i>.</td>
							<td>A gate-keeper.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Durryodhan</i>.</td>
							<td>One of the heroes of the <i lang="bn">Mahabharata</i> who was obliged to hide in a Lake called the Dvaipana Lake, to avoid capture; he was the eldest of the hundred sons of Dhritarastra.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td> </td>
							<td> </td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Eed</i>.</td>
							<td>A Mahomedan Festival.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td> </td>
							<td> </td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Ghât</i>.</td>
							<td>The name given to a landing or bathing-place on the bank of a river, also to a place for burning the dead..</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Gosain</i>.</td>
							<td>A class of Hindu religious mendicants..</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Gariwan</i>.</td>
							<td>Hackney coachman.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Guddee</i>.</td>
							<td>Literally— Couch. The principal seat at an assembly of notables. <q>To attain the guddee</q> is a synonym for succeeding to a title or to estates.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Golden Age</i>.</td>
							<td>The first of the four Hindu Ages. Literally—The Age of Truth.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Gharry</i>.</td>
							<td>Carriage.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Ghee</i>.</td>
							<td>Melted butter specially prepared for household cooking purposes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Gomashtha</i>.</td>
							<td>A land agent, or steward, the headman of the employees on an estate, or in a factory.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Ganga</i>.</td>
							<td>The river Ganges.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td> </td>
							<td> </td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Hanuman</i>.</td>
							<td>The monkey-god, a great favourite with Hindus. His story is told in the great epic— the <i lang="bn">Ramayana</i>, which, in its Hindi version by Tulsi Dass, is annually acted in Northern India.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Hom</i>.</td>
							<td>An offering of ghee, barley-meal, sandal and rice, fried over a fire.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Hori Bol</i>.</td>
							<td>A cry to Vishnu, as <q>The Saviour.</q></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td> </td>
							<td> </td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Jelabhi</i>.</td>
							<td>A sweetmeat made in twists.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Jemadar</i>.</td>
							<td>Originally an armed official of a zemindar in charge of fighting and conducting warfare, mostly against the rebellious peasants and common people who lived on the zemindar's land. Later, a rank in the Company's military forces.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td> </td>
							<td> </td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Kabiraj</i>.</td>
							<td>A Hindu physician.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Kalidas</i>.</td>
							<td>The Author of the popular Sanscrit Drama, <q><i lang="bn">Sakuntala.</i></q></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Kodàli</i>.</td>
							<td>A kind of bread hoe, used for breaking up the ground.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Kayasth</i>.</td>
							<td>A man of the writer caste.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Krishna</i>.</td>
							<td>The favourite Incarnation of Vishnu.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td> </td>
							<td> </td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Lanka</i>.</td>
							<td>A name for Ceylon in the <i lang="bn">Ramayana</i>.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Lakshmi</i>.</td>
							<td>Goddess of fortune and good luck.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Lathial</i>.</td>
							<td>One armed with a heavy stick, often employed by landlords in disputes with neighbours.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td> </td>
							<td> </td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Mohurrir</i>.</td>
							<td>A clerk.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Mantra</i>.</td>
							<td>A verse from the sacred hymns of the Vedas.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Mahadeva</i>.</td>
							<td>A name of Siva.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Mahajan</i>.</td>
							<td>A money-lender.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Machan</i>.</td>
							<td>A platform of bamboo, raised on piles above the ground.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Mallika</i>.</td>
							<td>A species of Jessamine.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Muktar</i>.</td>
							<td>An agent, or broker.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Moulvi</i>.</td>
							<td>A Mahomedan title of respect meaning ‘Learned.‘</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td> </td>
							<td> </td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Nala Raja</i>.</td>
							<td>The hero of the Sanskrit Drama, <q><i lang="bn">Nala and Damayanti.</i></q></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Naib</i>.</td>
							<td>An agent, or deputy of the landlord of an estate.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td> </td>
							<td> </td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Pandit</i>.</td>
							<td>A learned Brahman, learned in Sanskrit literature. Regular titles are conferred on Pandits according to the extent of their knowledge, as tested from time to time by an assembly of Pandits; one of these meets at the old Sanskrit University of Nuddea, or Navadwip.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Phalgun</i>.</td>
							<td>The month corresponding from February to March.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Paik</i>.</td>
							<td>Originally <q>a runner</q>:— Men employed by landlords as messengers.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td> </td>
							<td> </td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Ryot</i>.</td>
							<td>A cultivator.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Radha</i>.</td>
							<td>The wife of Krishna.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Ramzan</i>.</td>
							<td>The name given to the Mahomedan Lenten Fast.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td> </td>
							<td> </td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Shravan</i>.</td>
							<td>The month corresponding to July-August, the second month of the rainy season, when the rainfall is heaviest.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Shástras</i>.</td>
							<td>The name given to some of the Hindu Sacred Books especially to the Philosophical works.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Sari</i>.</td>
							<td>The usual dress of women, made of cotton, or silk, or muslin.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Suttee</i>.</td>
							<td>A woman who threw herself on her husband’s funeral pile was known as Suttee, "The Chaste One." Suttee was abolished under Lord Bentinck.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Satya Pir</i>.</td>
							<td>A Hindu deity regarded by Mahomedans as one of their saints.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Saraswati</i>.</td>
							<td>The Hindu goddess of learning.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Shorash</i>.</td>
							<td>A kind of funeral ceremony where sixteen different kinds of presents are distributed, six kinds being of silver.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Sephalika</i>.</td>
							<td>Nyctantes Arbor Tristis, flowering only at night.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Shraddha</i>.</td>
							<td>The Hindu funeral ceremony; see Wilkins’ <q>Modern Hinduism.</q></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Shal Fish</i>.</td>
							<td>A fish used in religious ceremonies; it is first roasted.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Sheristadar</i>.</td>
							<td>The Head Clerk in charge of the records of an office.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td> </td>
							<td> </td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Tol</i>.</td>
							<td>The name of the indigenous Sanskrit schools.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Tulsi</i>.</td>
							<td>Ocymum Sanctum. The basil honoured by all Hindus.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Tauba</i>.</td>
							<td>The Mahomedan cry of grief meaning, <q>I repent me of my sins.</q></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Tabala</i>.</td>
							<td>The name for the drum that is played with the right hand only.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Taluk</i>.</td>
							<td>A portion of an estate, consisting of several villages.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td> </td>
							<td> </td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Udjog Parba</i>.</td>
							<td>One of the cantos of the Mahabharat, giving the preliminary incidents of the Kurukshetra Battle.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td> </td>
							<td> </td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Veda</i>.</td>
							<td>The name given to the oldest sacred books of the Hindus meaning "Revelation."</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Vaishnava</i>.</td>
							<td>A follower of Vishnu; see Wilkins’ <q>Modern Hinduism.</q></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td> </td>
							<td> </td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Yudishthira</i>.</td>
							<td>Surnamed <q>The Incarnation of Virtue.</q> One of the heroes of the <i lang="bn">Mahabharata</i>.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Yama</i>.</td>
							<td>The Hindu god of Death.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td> </td>
							<td> </td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Zemindar</i>.</td>
							<td>A landholder.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td><i>Zenana</i>.</td>
							<td>The part of a Hindu or Muslim dwelling that is reserved for the women of the household.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
